      The Anthropocene
             http://anr.sagepub.com/
                                     Review


The geology of mankind? A critique of the Anthropocene narrative
                    Andreas Malm and Alf Hornborg
        The Anthropocene Review published online 7 January 2014
                   DOI: 10.1177/2053019613516291

               The online version of this article can be found at:
   http://anr.sagepub.com/content/early/2014/01/06/2053019613516291
   A more recent version of this article was published on - Mar 18, 2014


                                              Published by:

                             http://www.sagepublications.com


 Additional services and information for The Anthropocene Review can be found at:

                    Email Alerts: http://anr.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts

                 Subscriptions: http://anr.sagepub.com/subscriptions

               Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav

           Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav



                         Version of Record - Mar 18, 2014
               >> OnlineFirst Version of Record - Jan 7, 2014

                                             What is This?




                  Downloaded from anr.sagepub.com at Queen Mary, University of London on June 6, 2014
516291
research-article2014
                       ANR0010.1177/2053019613516291The Anthropocene ReviewMalm and Hornborg




                                                  Perspectives and controversies

                                                                                                                                                                                        The Anthropocene Review

                                                  The geology of mankind? A
                                                                                                                                                                                              201X, Vol XX(X) 1­–8
                                                                                                                                                                                             © The Author(s) 2014
                                                                                                                                                                                          Reprints and permissions:
                                                  critique of the Anthropocene                                                                                                sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
                                                                                                                                                                                  DOI: 10.1177/2053019613516291
                                                  narrative                                                                                                                                        anr.sagepub.com




                                                  Andreas Malm and Alf Hornborg



                                                  Abstract
                                                  The Anthropocene narrative portrays humanity as a species ascending to power over the rest
                                                  of the Earth System. In the crucial field of climate change, this entails the attribution of fossil fuel
                                                  combustion to properties acquired during human evolution, notably the ability to manipulate
                                                  fire. But the fossil economy was not created nor is it upheld by humankind in general. This
                                                  intervention questions the use of the species category in the Anthropocene narrative and argues
                                                  that it is analytically flawed, as well as inimical to action. Intra-species inequalities are part and
                                                  parcel of the current ecological crisis and cannot be ignored in attempts to understand it.

                                                  Keywords
                                                  Anthropocene, inequality, society




                                                  Since Nobel laureate Paul Crutzen (2002) proposed ‘the Anthropocene’ as a new geological epoch
                                                  in his short piece ‘The geology of mankind’ in Nature in 2002, the concept has enjoyed a truly
                                                  meteoric career. The currently unfolding discourse on the Anthropocene represents a convergence
                                                  of Earth System natural science and post-Cartesian1 social science as represented, for instance, by
                                                  Bruno Latour. Both fields suggest that the Enlightenment distinction between Nature and Society
                                                  is obsolete. Now that humanity is recognised as a geological force, the story goes, we must recon-
                                                  ceptualize not only the relations between natural and social sciences but also history, modernity
                                                  and the very idea of the human.2 Indeed, the increasingly inextricable interfusion of nature and
                                                  human society is incontrovertible, as evidenced not only by climate change but also by other kinds
                                                  of anthropogenic transformations of ecosystems.
                                                      The question we wish to address in this brief intervention is whether this should really prompt
                                                  us to abandon the fundamental concerns of social science, which importantly include the theoriza-
                                                  tion of culture and power. We shall suggest that the physical mixing of nature and society does not

                                                  Lund University, Sweden                                                                   Corresponding author:
                                                                                                                                            Andreas Malm, Human Ecology Division, Lund University,
                                                                                                                                            Geocentrum 1, Lund 22362, Sweden.
                                                                                                                                            Email: Andreas.Malm@lucid.lu.se




                                                                                               Downloaded from anr.sagepub.com at Queen Mary, University of London on June 6, 2014
2                                                                                              The Anthropocene Review XX(X)

warrant the abandonment of their analytical distinction. Rather, precisely this increasing recogni-
tion of the potency of social relations of power to transform the very conditions of human existence
should justify a more profound engagement with social and cultural theory. We find it deeply para-
doxical and disturbing that the growing acknowledgement of the impact of societal forces on the
biosphere should be couched in terms of a narrative so completely dominated by natural science.
Moreover, in line with the abandonment of Cartesian dualism in our approach to the material con-
ditions of human existence, we have no less reason to reconsider human economies and technolo-
gies as similarly hybrid phenomena interlacing biophysical resources, cultural perceptions and
global power structures.
    According to the standard Anthropocene narrative, the Industrial Revolution marks the onset of
large-scale human modification of the Earth System, primarily in the form of climate change, the
most salient and perilous transgression of Holocene parameters. More precisely, in his 2002 piece,
Crutzen suggested that James Watt’s invention of the steam-engine inaugurated the new epoch, and
the chronology stuck: in the burgeoning literature on the Anthropocene, the steam-engine is often
referred to as the one artefact that unlocked the potentials of fossil energy and thereby catapulted
the human species to full-spectrum dominance (e.g. Alberts, 2011: 6; Beerling, 2007: 8; Berners-
Lee and Clark, 2013: 8–10; Irwin, 2010: 1; Lynas, 2011: 21; Robin and Steffen, 2007: 1699; Sayre,
2012: 58; Steffen et al., 2011: 844–845).
    Theorists of the epoch have little to say about the actual causes of the rise of steam, but they do
propound a general framework for understanding the transition to fossil fuels in the Industrial
Revolution, which, for reasons of logical necessity, is deduced from human nature. If the dynamics
were of a more contingent character, the narrative of an entire species – the anthropos as such –
ascending to biospheric supremacy would be difficult to uphold: ‘the geology of mankind’ must
have its roots in the properties of that being. Anything less would make it a geology of some
smaller entity, perhaps some subset of Homo sapiens. Even when the Anthropocene is dated to the
time of Watt – and not to the rise of agricultural civilisations, as in the ‘early Anthropocene’ hypoth-
esis (e.g. Ruddiman, 2003; Smith and Zeder, 2013) – the fuse is often traced back into the mists of
time, lit in the early evolution of the human species.
    A key component of the Anthropocene narrative is thus the manipulation of fire: the path to the
fossil economy was laid down when our hominid ancestors once upon a time learned to control
fire. Here was ‘the essential evolutionary trigger for the Anthropocene’, in the words of Rapuach
and Canadell: fossil fuel combustion is result of the fact that ‘long before the industrial era, a par-
ticular primate species learned how to tap the energy reserves stored in detrital carbon’ (Raupach
and Canadell, 2010: 210–211). Or, in the words of Will Steffan, Paul J Crutzen and John R McNeill:
‘The mastery of fire by our ancestors provided humankind with a powerful monopolistic tool una-
vailable to other species, that put us firmly on the long path towards the Anthropocene’ (Steffen
et al., 2007: 614, emphasis added; cf. Clark, 2012; Crosby, 2006; Steffen et al., 2011: 846). In this
narrative, the fossil economy is the creation precisely of humankind, or ‘the fire-ape, Homo
pyrophilis’, as in Mark Lynas’ popularisation of Anthropocene thinking, aptly titled The God
Species (Lynas, 2011).
    A scrutiny of the transition to fossil fuels in 19th-century Britain (Malm, 2013a), however,
reveals the extent to which the historical origins of anthropogenic climate change were predicated
on highly inequitable global processes from the start (cf. Frank, 1998; Pomeranz, 2000). The
rationale for investing in steam technology at this time was geared to the opportunities provided by
the constellation of a largely depopulated New World, Afro-American slavery, the exploitation of
British labour in factories and mines, and the global demand for inexpensive cotton cloth. Steam-
engines were not adopted by some natural-born deputies of the human species: by the nature of the




                          Downloaded from anr.sagepub.com at Queen Mary, University of London on June 6, 2014
Malm and Hornborg                                                                                             3

social order of things, they could only be installed by the owners of the means of production. A tiny
minority even in Britain, this class of people comprised an infinitesimal fraction of the population
of Homo sapiens in the early 19th century. Indeed, a clique of white British men literally pointed
steam-power as a weapon – on sea and land, boats and rails – against the best part of humankind,
from the Niger delta to the Yangzi delta, the Levant to Latin America (cf. Headrick, 1981, 2010).
Capitalists in a small corner of the Western world invested in steam, laying the foundation stone for
the fossil economy: at no moment did the species vote for it either with feet or ballots, or march in
mechanical unison, or exercise any sort of shared authority over its own destiny and that of the
Earth System.3
    The ability to manipulate fire was, of course, a necessary condition for the commencement of
fossil fuel burning in Britain. So were tool-use, language, co-operative labour and a whole range of
other human faculties – but they were trivial necessary conditions, lacking correlation with the
outcome of interest. The error here is well-covered in historiographical textbooks. To invoke ultra-
remote causes of this kind ‘is like explaining the success of the Japanese fighter pilots in terms of
the fact that prehumans evolved binocular vision and opposable thumbs. We expect the causes we
cite to connect rather more directly to consequences’, or else we disregard them, as pointed out by
John Lewis Gaddis (Gaddis, 2002: 96; cf. Bloch, 1992: 158–159). Attempts to attribute climate
change to the nature of the human species appear doomed to this sort of vacuity. Put differently,
transhistorical – particularly species-wide – drivers cannot be invoked to explain a qualitatively
novel order in history, such as mechanized, steam-power production of commodities for export to
the world-market.
    How about later stages of the fossil economy? The succession of energy technologies following
steam – electricity, the internal combustion engine, the petroleum complex: cars, tankers, aviation
– have all been introduced through investment decisions, sometimes with crucial input from cer-
tain governments but rarely through democratic deliberation. The privilege of instigating new
rounds appears to have stayed with the class ruling commodity production. Reflecting an intra-
species concentration on another level, as of 2008, the advanced capitalist countries or the ‘North’
composed 18.8% of the world population, but were responsible for 72.7 of the CO2 emitted since
1850, subnational inequalities uncounted. In the early 21st century, the poorest 45% of the human
population accounted for 7% of emissions, while the richest 7% produced 50%; a single average
US citizen – national class divisions again disregarded – emitted as much as upwards of 500 citi-
zens of Ethiopia, Chad, Afghanistan, Mali, Cambodia or Burundi (Roberts and Parks, 2007). Are
these basic facts reconcilable with a view of humankind as the new geological agent?
    We would argue that, to the contrary, uneven distribution is a condition for the very existence of
modern, fossil-fuel technology (Hornborg, 2001, 2011). The affluence of high-tech modernity can-
not possibly be universalized – become an asset of the species – because it is predicated on a global
division of labour that is geared precisely to abysmal price and wage differences between popula-
tions. The density of distribution of technologies that are ultimately dependent on fossil fuels by
and large coincides with that of purchasing power. These technologies are an index of capital
accumulation, privileged resource consumption, and the displacement of both work and environ-
mental loads. After more than 200 years, we still tend to imagine ‘technological progress’ as noth-
ing but the magic wand of ingenuity which, with no necessary political or moral implications
elsewhere, will solve our local problems of sustainability. But globalized technological systems
essentially represent an unequal exchange of embodied labour and land in the world-system. The
world-view of modern economics, the emergence of which accompanied the Industrial Revolution
in the hub of the British Empire, systematically obscures the asymmetric exchange of biophysical
resources on which industrialization rests. This disjunction between exchange values and physics




                        Downloaded from anr.sagepub.com at Queen Mary, University of London on June 6, 2014
4                                                                                             The Anthropocene Review XX(X)

is as much a condition for modern technology as engineering. The uneven accumulation of techno-
mass visible on satellite photos of night-time lights proceeds by means of a simple algorithm: the
more fossil fuels and other resources capital has dissipated today, the more it will afford to dissi-
pate tomorrow. Perceptions of ‘technology’, no less than perceptions of ‘Nature’, are cultural con-
structions conditioned by global power structures: the promises of fossil-fuelled technology to
humankind were illusory all along. Our narratives of this destructive force should not replicate
those illusions.
    The best counter-shot for the Anthropocene narrative seems to be population growth: if it can be
shown that fossil fuel combustion is largely fanned by the multiplication of human numbers, the
species can indeed be held causally responsible. Thus the leading Anthropocene theorists like to
foreground this as one or even the major perturbation of the biosphere (e.g. Crutzen, 2002, 2006:
14; Steffen et al., 2007: 618; Zalasiewicz et al., 2008: 4, 2010: 2228–2229). Granted, there is a
correlation between human population and CO2 emissions, but the latter increased by a factor of
654.8 between 1820 and 2010 (Boden et al., 2013), while the former ‘only’ did so by a factor of 6.6
(Maddison, 2006: 241; United Nations, 2011), indicating that another, far more powerful engine
must have driven the fires. For recent decades, the correlation has been revealed as outright nega-
tive. David Satterthwaite juxtaposed rates of population growth to rates of emissions growth in the
quarter-century between 1980 and 2005, and found that numbers tended to rise fastest where emis-
sions grew slowest, and vice versa (Satterthwaite, 2009). The rise of population and the rise of
emissions were disconnected from each other, the one mostly happening in places where the other
did not – and if a correlation is negative, causation is out of the question.
    A significant chunk of humanity is not party to the fossil economy at all: hundreds of millions
rely on charcoal, firewood or organic waste such as dung for all domestic purposes. Satterthwaite
concluded that one-sixth of the human population ‘best not be included in allocations of responsi-
bility for GHG emissions’ (Satterthwaite, 2009: 547–550). Their contribution is close to zero.
Moreover, 2 billion people, or nearly one-third of humanity, have no access to electricity, and so,
in the words of Vaclav Smil, ‘the difference in modern energy consumption between a subsistence
pastoralist in the Sahel and an average Canadian may easily be larger than 1,000-fold’ (Smil, 2008:
259). Depending on the circumstances in which a specimen of Homo sapiens is born, then, her
imprint on the atmosphere may vary by a factor of more than 1000 (Satterthwaite, 2009: 564).
Given these enormous variations – in space and in time: the present and the past – humanity seems
far too slender an abstraction to carry the burden of causality.
    Now, proponents of the Anthropocene might object that from the standpoint of all other living
things, and indeed from the biosphere as a whole, what really matters is that climatic disruption
originates from within the human species, even if not all of it is to blame, and so a species-based
term for the new geological epoch is warranted. A Tuareg pastoralist or a Toronto paymaster, the
burner of fossil fuels is, after all, human. This seems to be a compelling argument, providing the
Anthropocene concept with a rather solid rationale. It is indicative of the term’s origins in the natu-
ral sciences, geologists, meteorologists, biologists and others having detected an overwhelming
human influence on ecosystems, now ranged alongside natural selection, solar radiation and vol-
canic activity. The ‘Anthropocene’ registers this moment of epiphany: the power to shape planetary
climate has passed from nature into the realm of humans.
    As soon as this is recognised, however, the main paradox of the narrative, if not of the concept
as such, becomes visible: climate change is denaturalised in one moment – relocated from the
sphere of natural causes to that of human activities – only to be renaturalised in the next, when
derived from an innate human trait, such as the ability to control fire. Not nature, but human
nature – this is the Anthropocene displacement. It backs away from the vertiginous depth of




                         Downloaded from anr.sagepub.com at Queen Mary, University of London on June 6, 2014
Malm and Hornborg                                                                                             5

perhaps the most ground-breaking scientific discovery of our time, which tells us that human
beings have caused global warming over the course of their history. This kind of history does not
appear in the biography of any other species: beavers and bonobos continue to construct their own
micro-environments as they always have, generation upon familiar generation, while a certain
human community may burn wood for ten millennia straight and then coal the next century.
Realising that climate change is ‘anthropogenic’ is really to appreciate that it is sociogenic.4 It has
arisen as a result of temporally fluid social relations as they materialise through the rest of nature,
and once this ontological insight – implicit in the science of climate change – is truly taken
onboard, one can no longer treat humankind as merely a species-being determined by its biologi-
cal evolution. Nor can one write off divisions between human beings as immaterial to the broader
picture, for such divisions have been an integral part of fossil fuel combustion in the first place
(Hornborg, 2001, 2011).
    Following climate science out of nature, we should dare to probe the depths of social his-
tory: not relapse into the false certitude of another natural inevitability. The Anthropocene
narrative could here be seen as an illogical and ultimately self-defeating foray of the natural
science community – responsible for the original discovery of climate change – into the
domain of human affairs. Geologists, meteorologists and their colleagues are not necessarily
well-equipped to study the sort of things that take place between humans (and perforce between
them and the rest of nature), the composition of a rock or the pattern of a jet stream being
rather different from such phenomena as world-views, property and power. Now that the latter
layers of earthly existence mould the former, some epistemological confusion is perhaps to be
expected. Against this background, ‘the Anthropocene’ resembles an attempt to conceptually
traverse the gap between the natural and the social – already thoroughly fused in reality –
through the construction of a bridge from one side only, leading the traffic, as it were, in a
direction opposite to the actual process: in climate change, social relations determine natural
conditions; in Anthropocene thinking, natural scientists extend their world-views to society.
    Needless to say, this re-naturalisation of climate change is as much (if not more) a product of
behaviour in the social sciences and humanities, namely the late awakening to a warming world.
The baton has failed to pass between ‘the two cultures’, and now that the latter is slowly catching
up, ‘the Anthropocene’ is already an entrenched concept and mode of thinking. Regrettably, many
a social scientist and humanist has swallowed it lock, stock and barrel, oblivious to its anti-social
tendencies, attracted by the idea of the anthropos as centre and master of the universe (be it produc-
tive or destructive), which speaks to certain humanist sensibilities (e.g. Alberts, 2011; Palsson
et al., 2013; Szerszynski, 2012).
    Perhaps the most important interventions from critical theory into the Anthropocene debate has
been made by Dipesh Chakrabarty, who, in his essay ‘The climate of history: Four theses’, reflects
on some of the pitfalls of species-thinking, but ends up endorsing it as a necessary project
(Chakrabarty, 2009). Humanity really is constituted as a universal species agent that ‘flashes up in
the moment of the danger that is climate change’, most starkly in the extreme weather events
emblematic of the new epoch: ‘Unlike in the crises of capitalism, there are no lifeboats here for the
rich and the privileged (witness the drought in Australia or recent fires in the wealthy neighbor-
hoods of California)’ (Chakrabarty, 2009: 221). But this is a flawed argument. It blatantly over-
looks the realities of differentiated vulnerability on all scales of human society: witness Katrina in
black and white neighborhoods of New Orleans, or Sandy in Haiti and Manhattan, or sea level rise
in Bangladesh and the Netherlands, or practically any other impact, direct or indirect, of climate
change. For the foreseeable future – indeed, as long as there are human societies on Earth – there
will be lifeboats for the rich and privileged. If climate change represents a form of apocalypse, it is




                        Downloaded from anr.sagepub.com at Queen Mary, University of London on June 6, 2014
6                                                                                               The Anthropocene Review XX(X)

not universal, but uneven and combined: the species is as much an abstraction at the end of the line
as at the source (cf. Malm, 2013b; Malm and Esmailian, 2012).
   As for the drivers of climate change, naturalisation has an easily recognisable form. ‘Certain
social relations appears as the natural properties of things’, to speak with Karl Marx: production is
‘encased in eternal natural laws independent of history, at which opportunity bourgeois relations
are then quietly smuggled in as the inviolable natural laws on which society in the abstract is
founded’ – or the human species in abstract (Marx, 1990: 1005, 1993: 87, emphases in original).
The effect is to block off any prospect for change. If global warming is the outcome of the knowl-
edge of how to light a fire, or some other property of the human species acquired in some distant
stage of its evolution, how can we even imagine a dismantling of the fossil economy? Or: ‘the
Anthropocene’ might be a useful concept and narrative for polar bears and amphibians and birds
who want to know what species is wreaking such havoc on their habitats, but alas, they lack the
capacity to scrutinise and stand up to human actions. Within the human kingdom, on the other
hand, species-thinking on climate change is conducive to mystification and political paralysis. It
cannot serve as a basis for challenging the vested interests of business-as-usual.
   There is, however, a noteworthy difference between the bourgeois political economists Marx
attacked and the Anthropocene narrative. Scholars naturalising climate change are rarely if ever
working on behalf of the vested interests of business-as-usual. Most would likely wish to see them
gone. Insofar as it occludes the historical origins of global warming and sinks the fossil economy
into unalterable conditions, ‘the Anthropocene’ is an ideology more by default than by design,
more the product of the dominance of natural science in the field of climate change and, perhaps,
the general blunting of critical edges and narrowing of political horizons in the post-1989 world
than of any malicious apologetics. It is not necessarily any less harmful for that. It is one of several
theoretical frameworks which happen to be not only analytically defective, but also inimical to
action.

Funding
We thank the Swedish Research Council for Environment, Agriculture and Spatial Planning (FORMAS) for
supporting the Lund University Centre of Excellence for Integration of Social and Natural Dimensions of
Sustainability, LUCID, which has provided us with the opportunity to write this article.

Notes
1.   By ‘post-Cartesian’, we mean approaches that abandon Cartesian distinctions such as between Society
     and Nature or between subject and object.
2.   Programme for the conference ‘Thinking the Anthropocene’, Paris, 13–15 November 2013.
3.   Nor is the Anthropocene narrative itself today conducive to democracy, but rather the opposite; cf. Leach
     (2013).
4.   The neologism ‘sociogenic’ is, of course, means to indicate that the driving forces derive from a
     specific social structure, rather than a species-wide trait. Similarly, Richard Norgaard (2013) has
     recently suggested that we think in terms of the ‘Econocene’, in view of ‘the 50-fold increase and
     the globalization of economic activity during the 20th century’. Two other candidates worth consid-
     eration – both proposed to better integrate social and natural aspects – are the ‘Technocene’ and the
     ‘Capitalocene’.

References
Alberts P (2011) Responsibility towards life in the early Anthropocene. Angelaki: Journal of the Theoretical
    Humanities 16: 5–17.




                           Downloaded from anr.sagepub.com at Queen Mary, University of London on June 6, 2014
Malm and Hornborg                                                                                              7

Beerling D (2007) The Emerald Planet: How Plants Changed Earth’s History. Oxford: Oxford University
     Press.
Berners-Lee M and Clark D (2013) The Burning Question: We Can’t Burn Half the World’s Oil, Coal and
     Gas. So How Do We Quit? London: Profile Books.
Bloch M (1992) [1954] The Historian’s Craft. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Boden TA, Marland G and Andres RJ (2013) Global, Regional, and National Fossil-Fuel CO2 Emissions.
     Oak Ridge, CA: Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, US
     Department of Energy.
Chakrabarty D (2009) The climate of history: Four theses. Critical Inquiry 35: 197–222.
Clark N (2012) Rock, life, fire: Speculative geophysics and the Anthropocene. Oxford Literary Review 34:
     259–276.
Crosby AW (2006) Children of the Sun: A History of Humanity’s Unappeasable Appetite for Energy. New
     York: WW Norton.
Crutzen PJ (2002) Geology of mankind. Nature 415: 23.
Crutzen PJ (2006) The ‘Anthropocene’. In: Ehlers E and Kraftt T (eds) Earth System Science in the
     Anthropocene: Emerging Issues and Problems. Berlin: Springer, pp. 13–18.
Frank AG (1998) ReOrient: Global Economy in the Asian Age. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Gaddis JL (2002) The Landscape of History: How Historians Map the Past. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Headrick D (1981) The Tools of Empire: Technology and European Imperialism in the Nineteenth Century.
     Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Headrick D (2010) Power over Peoples: Technology, Environments, and Western Imperialism, 1400 to the
     Present. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hornborg A (2001) The Power of the Machine: Global Inequalities of Economy, Technology, and Environment.
     Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.
Hornborg A (2011) Global Ecology and Unequal Exchange: Fetishism in a Zero-Sum World. London:
     Routledge.
Irwin R (2010) Introduction. In: Irwin R (ed.) Climate Change and Philosophy: Transformational Possibilities.
     London: Continuum, pp. 1–17.
Leach M (2013) Democracy in the Anthropocene? Science and Sustainable Development Goals at the UN.
     Available at: www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/Melissa-Leach/democracy-in-the-anthropocene
Lynas M (2011) The God Species: How the Planet Can Survive the Age of Humans. London: Fourth Estate.
Maddison A (2006) The World Economy, Vol. 1: A Millennial Perspective, and vol. 2: Historical Perspectives.
     Paris: OECD.
Malm A (2013a) The origins of fossil capital: From water to steam in the British cotton industry. Historical
     Materialism 21: 15–68.
Malm A (2013b) Sea wall politics: Uneven and combined protection of the Nile Delta coastline in the face of
     sea level rise. Critical Sociology 39: 803–832.
Malm A and Esmailian S (2012) Ways in and out of vulnerability to climate change: Abandoning the Mubarak
     Project in the northern Nile Delta, Egypt. Antipode 45: 474–492.
Marx K (1990) [1867] Capital, Vol. 1. London: Penguin.
Marx K (1993) [1973] Grundrisse. London: Penguin.
Norgaard RB (2013) The Econocene and the California delta. San Francisco Estuary & Watershed Science
     11: 1–5.
Palsson G, Szerszynski B, Sörlin S et al. (2013) Reconceptualizing the ‘Anthropos’ in the Anthropocene:
     Integrating the social sciences and humanities in global environmental change research. Environmental
     Science and Policy 28: 3–13.
Pomeranz K (2000) The Great Divergence: China, Europe, and the Making of the Modern World Economy.
     Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Raupach M and Canadell J (2010) Carbon and the Anthropocene. Current Opinion in Environmental
     Sustainability 2: 210–218.
Robin L and Steffen W (2007) History for the Anthropocene. History Compass 5: 1694–1719.




                         Downloaded from anr.sagepub.com at Queen Mary, University of London on June 6, 2014
8                                                                                              The Anthropocene Review XX(X)

Roberts JT and Parks BC (2007) A Climate of Injustice: Global Inequality, North-South Politics, and Climate
     Policy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ruddiman WF (2003) The anthropogenic greenhouse era began thousands of years ago. Climatic Change 61:
     261–293.
Satterthwaite D (2009) The implications of population growth and urbanization for climate change.
     Environment & Urbanization 21: 545–567.
Sayre NF (2012) The politics of the Anthropogenic. Annual Review of Anthropology 41: 57–70.
Smil V (2008) Energy in Nature and Society: General Energetics of Complex Systems. Cambridge, MA: MIT
     Press.
Smith BD and Zeder MA (2013) The onset of the Anthropocene. Anthropocene. Available at: http://dx.doi.
     org/10.1016/j.ancene.2013.05.001.
Steffen W, Crutzen PJ and McNeill JR (2007) The Anthropocene: Are humans now overwhelming the great
     forces of nature? Ambio 36: 614–621.
Steffen W, Grinevald J, Crutzen P et al. (2011) The Anthropocene: Conceptual and historical perspectives.
     Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A 369: 842–867.
Szerszynski B (2012) The end of the end of nature: The Anthropocene and the fate of the human. Oxford
     Literary Review 34: 165–184.
United Nations (2011) World Population Prospects: The 2012 Revision. UN Department of Economic and
     Social Affairs, Population Division, CD-ROM edition.
Zalasiewicz J, Williams M, Smith A et al. (2008) Are we now living in the Anthropocene? GSA Today 18:
     4–8.
Zalasiewicz J, Williams M, Steffen W et al. (2010) The new world of the Anthropocene. Environmental
     Science & Technology 44: 2228–2231.




                          Downloaded from anr.sagepub.com at Queen Mary, University of London on June 6, 2014
