Selected pdftotext extract only; no whole-book reading claimed.
PDF page 20
                         INTRODUCTION




Our collective cultural heritage, the legacy that we leave behind for
the generations to come, faces a serious problem in the digital age. We
used to, as a rule, forget. Now we have the power of recall and retrieval
at a scale that will decisively change how our society remembers. For
historians, professionals who interpret and bring shape to narratives
of the past, this is a dramatic shift. The digital age brings with it great
power: the prospect of a more democratic history and of more voices
included in the historical record, a realization of the social historian’s
dream. Yet it also brings significant challenges: what does it mean to
write histories with born-digital sources – from websites written in the
mid-1990s to tweets posted today? How can we be ready, from a tech-
nical perspective as well as from a social or ethical one, to use the web
as a historical source – as an archive? Historians with the training and
resources are about to have far more primary sources, and the ability to
process them, at their fingertips. What will this all mean for our under-
standing of the past? How can these sources be used responsibly? Finally,
if historians cannot rise to the moment, what does this mean for the
future of our profession?
    The problem can be summed up in something as innocuous as a
personal homepage, hosted on the free GeoCities.com service. GeoCities.
com, founded in 1994, provided free websites to anybody who wanted
to create one. A user would visit GeoCities.com, enter an email address,
and receive a free megabyte (later two, then ten) to stake an individual
space on the burgeoning Information Superhighway. These sites took
many shapes and sizes: a Buffy the Vampire Slayer fan site, a celebration
of a favourite sports team, a family tree, even a young child’s tribute to
Winnie the Pooh. Early web users flocked. By October 1995, the first


PDF page 21
4                     History in the Age of Abundance?


ten thousand users had created their sites. Two years later, a million
had. And by 2009, some seven million users had created accounts on
GeoCities.com. While just how to define a webpage itself is a compli-
cated question – as we explore in this book, a webpage is really a
collection of resources and files (from text, images, embedded widgets,
movies, to style sheets, or other interactive components) that are pulled
together by your web browser – it is clear that these 7 million accounts
are emblematic of the growing scale of web archives. Indeed, if we count
these unique webpages, we see that there were over 186 million of them.
Yet if you visit GeoCities.com today, you will see only an advertisement
for one of Yahoo!’s website hosting services – no evidence at all of the
human activity that had once happened there. Without web archiving,
these websites would have been, for the most part, irretrievably lost.
    Thanks to the Internet Archive, however, we can today “visit”
GeoCities. The San Francisco–based Internet Archive, founded in April
1996 by Brewster Kahle and Bruce Gilliat, grew out of a recognition
that people were increasingly living their lives online and that this
culture was in danger.1 Legally designated a library in 2007 by the State
of California, the non-profit Internet Archive now has expansive hold-
ings, including hundreds of billions of webpages, millions of books,
audio recordings, videos, and images, and over a hundred thousand
software programs, all freely accessible at http://archive.org.2 When you
go to the Internet Archive’s website and access one of their archived
websites, you are accessing data stored on a hard drive within their
repurposed Christian Science church in San Francisco’s Richmond
District (see figure i.1).
    In many ways, the founding of the Internet Archive in 1996 was
a visionary act. The library was a critical reaction to the fact that our
society was undergoing a medium shift in how we document our lives,
societies, and cultures. As the West rapidly transitioned from traditional
print sources, which we had preservation strategies for, towards digital
bits and bytes, the transitory nature of websites and content opened up
an opportunity for the Internet Archive to help preserve our cultural
memory. The Archive does so in part by collecting the world’s largest
web archive, the generic term for the collections of web content for
use by present and future historians, researchers, and even members of
the public; web archiving is the process of gathering, storing, preserv-
ing, and making accessible that data.3 As we collectively move online,


PDF page 22
                                      Introduction                                     5




Fig i.1 A rack of servers at the Internet Archive in San Francisco. The light in the
middle of the left rack shows an access operation happening, presumably a user
finding content amongst the billions of resources stored there.



we also produce far fewer traditional paper records than we did before,
making this preservation process increasingly indispensable.
    You can visit the Internet Archive’s Wayback Machine at http://
archive.org/web and “go back in time” to visit the rudimentary, often
broken, archived copies of personal (or corporate, or educational, or
beyond) websites collected between 1996 and 2009. The Wayback
Machine – the name comes from Sherman and Mr Peabody’s “WABAC
machine” from the Rocky and Bullwinkle Show – is the Internet Archive’s
portal to let you access their collections. Try it yourself by visiting the
Wayback Machine and searching for http://GeoCities.com. In the case
of GeoCities, it offers over 186 million distinct web addresses, some
32 billion words to index, search, and explore. This information is now
at the fingertips of anybody with an internet connection and a web
browser, to remotely access and explore information held on those hard
drives in California. That the voices of so many could conceivably reside
on a (big) hard drive speaks volumes about how the historical record
is dramatically changing. GeoCities exemplifies the shifting scope of
how we gather, preserve, and provide access to our culture’s historical
