Selected pdftotext extract only; no whole-book reading claimed.
PDF page 13
                             The Transformation of Historical Research in the Digital Age                                   7

                   changing approaches towards idea circulation, and the potential for interdiscip-
                   linary engagement.
                      Historians have rarely been transparent enough about many of the above
                   topics: we treat scholarship as ﬁnished products, and methods are too often
                   relegated to footnotes or informal discussions.16 We could all do better history
                   by reﬂecting on the ongoing technological transformation that is changing how
                   we research.

                             1.3 Are We All Digital Historians Now? Digital History
                                         and the Digital Humanities
                   Scholars have been exploring how to explicitly use new and emerging tech-
                   nologies for humanistic and historical research since the 1950s and 1960s,
                   under the auspices of what we today call the Digital Humanities or more
                   speciﬁcally Digital History. The relationship between these two DHs is compli-
                   cated. Digital History owes its lineage both to the Digital Humanities and also
                   to currents and trends within the broader historical profession, particularly
                   public history.
                      The Digital Humanities, broadly deﬁned, explore the intersection of technol-
                   ogy and the humanities.17 In many ways, as Adam Crymble has explored at
                   length, the Digital Humanities grows out of a digital literary studies tradition
                   (by way of the Text Encoding Initiative and humanities computing scholars).18
                   Historians have traditionally been underrepresented within the broad scope of
                   the Digital Humanities and its earlier intellectual approaches.19
                      Digital History can be expansively deﬁned as the intersection of historical
                   scholarship with new and emerging technology. In practice, this can be broken
                   into two subﬁelds. First, some Digital Historians use technology to reach new
                   and different audiences with new media, continuing a lineage of historians
                   using new media to carry out the mission of social and public history. An
                   understanding of the democratizing potential of technology has been founda-
                   tional to this approach.20 Secondly, other Digital Historians have used technol-
                   ogy to do historical scholarship.21 These scholars in part emerged from earlier
                   approaches to quantitative history and historical demography – Social Science

                   16
                      As well articulated in Arguing with Digital History Workshop, ‘Digital History and Argument’.
                   17
                      Deﬁning the digital humanities is a topic that has ﬁlled up entire volumes. See the Debates in
                      Digital Humanities series published by the University of Minnesota Press.
                   18
                      Crymble, Technology and the Historian, 29.
                   19
                      There are exceptions, of course. Canadian digital historian Chad Gafﬁeld, for example, was
                      awarded the Association of Digital Humanities’ Organization’s Antonio Zampolli Prize – the
                      organization’s highest award – in 2012.
                   20
                      Crymble, Technology and the Historian, ch. 2.
                   21
                      The focus of Graham, Milligan, and Weingart, Exploring Big Historical Data.

[Download-session footer omitted.]


PDF page 14
               8                              Historical Theory and Practice

               historians – as well as a smaller group of historians inﬂuenced by the more
               literary-focused computational studies approaches.22
                  Today, Digital Historians engage in a wide variety of scholarship. They may
               write programs or leverage computational platforms to assemble sources en
               masse, such as from records housed at the Internet Archive or the Library of
               Congress. Data are analysed by extracting features (i.e., word frequency,
               detected items in images, place names) before being subsequently analysed
               and visualized in a variety of ways.23 Other Digital Historians challenge
               conventional norms of scholarship, exploring new methods of scholarly com-
               munication. While it is impossible to do justice to this ﬁeld in a few sentences, it
               is a vibrant subﬁeld adopting explicit new methodologies and approaches.
                  Yet what about other historians who use computers to do their work but who
               do not fall into the above categories? Historians now all use databases, run
               keyword searches across millions of documents, and take digital cameras to turn
               scholarly documents into electronic ﬁles to be analysed at home. Are we now all
               digital historians?
                  There is a fruitful distinction to be made between Digital History – the
               delineated ﬁeld of study bounded by academic journals, conferences, and
               pedagogical approaches – and ‘digitized history’, or the broader transformation
               prompted by technology. We are not all Digital Historians (my capitalization is
               deliberate). But we all engage with digitized sources and workﬂows. It is unwise
               to silo historical engagement with technology as a subﬁeld given its sweeping
               impact on the entire profession. A focus on Digital History can make the rest of
               the historical profession think that ‘we are not digital historians’, as they ﬁre up
               their web browsers and research over the Internet. We are all digital now.

                                          1.4 The Digitally Aware Historian
               Let me close this introduction on an optimistic note by imagining a digitally
               aware historian who takes the content of this Element to heart. What kind of
               work would a historian who was fully cognizant of the work that technology
               was playing in mediating their work do?
                  They begin to research their topic in a newspaper database. But rather than
               haphazard keyword searches, they instead look at which newspapers and years
               are included in the database – and which ones are not. They then explicitly
               consider selection bias (why was this newspaper digitized but not that one) and
               do some contextual research on the period’s newspapers. Perhaps at the end of
               the day they believe that the accessible advantages of the digitized newspapers

               22
                    Crymble, Technology and the Historian, 44–5.
               23
                    See an overview in Romein et al., ‘State of the Field’.

[Download-session footer omitted.]


PDF page 15
                             The Transformation of Historical Research in the Digital Age                                   9

                   outweigh the limitations of their selectivity bias, and accordingly write a few
                   sentences to that effect in their introduction. This sets the tone for their engage-
                   ment with sources throughout their manuscript. The historian thinks about what
                   is present and what is missing. For an event, they go page-by-page for a few
                   weeks before and after the event, developing a contextual sense of the source as
                   well as to ensure that the OCR has not missed salient keywords. Scholarship is
                   still assisted by databases, but every step is deliberate and thoughtful. When
                   a button in the interface is clicked, it is done so deliberately. The database is no
                   longer a black box.
                      The time then comes to work with other digitized primary sources, and many
                   of the same questions come to the historian’s mind: what’s there? What’s not
                   there? They respectfully email an archival colleague and ask these questions.
                   The sources that are used are deliberately framed and contextualized. They
                   understand their sources and are self-reﬂective about their use.
                      The historian then goes to the archive. They anticipate a follow-up archival trip,
                   to follow theoretical rabbit holes that will inevitably arise when looking through
                   their digitized photographs at home after their trip. As they leave the archive, they
                   offer to share photographs with the archive as well in case it might help. After
                   ﬁnishing their research, they tweet about their work, think about primary sources,
                   and are transparent in their writing about argument, method, and approach.
                      Maybe they will become a Digital Historian. This could entail adopting new
                   analytical lenses, moving away from the typical approach of ‘close reading’ to
                   one of distant reading. Alternatively, they could draw on metadata to visualize
                   interconnections between sources, or challenge norms of scholarship by pub-
                   lishing a database, a map, or another novel form of scholarly communication.
                   New frontiers may then present themselves. But most historians will not go
                   down this route. Instead, what we have seen in the above hypothetical of
                   a digitally conscious researcher is one that pays heed to the mediating inﬂuence
                   of technology on their work. The researcher understands that the way by which
                   sources are mediated has had profound impact on how they are read, under-
                   stood, and contextualized. In short, this is a digitally-aware historian, actively
                   using technology rather than being shaped by it.

                                                   2 Libraries and Databases
                   The 1990s witnessed the rise of primary source mass digitization projects.
                   Building upon the intellectual foundation provided by earlier projects, such as
                   Project Gutenberg (a volunteer book transcription effort dating back to 1971
                   and the ARPANET), by the 1990s there were projects such as the Library of
                   Congress’ American Memory Project, American historian Ed Ayers’


[Download-session footer omitted.]
