Hygienic Modernity
Meanings of Health and Disease in Treaty-Port China


ruth rogaski




University of California Press
berkeley     los angeles         london
University of California Press
Berkeley and Los Angeles, California

University of California Press, Ltd.
London, England

© 2004 by
The Regents of the University of California


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Rogaski, Ruth.
     Hygienic modernity : meanings of health and disease in treaty-port
  China / Ruth Rogaski.
        p. cm. — (Asia: Local studies/global themes ; 9)
     Includes bibliographical references and index.
     isbn 0-520-24001-4 (cloth : alk. paper).
     1. Health behavior—China. 2. Public health—China.
  I. Title. II. Series.

  ra776.5.r59 2004
  362.1'0951'09034—dc22                                        2003019001

Manufactured in the United States of America

13   12 11 10 09 08 07 06                05   04
10   9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

The paper used in this publication is both acid-free and totally chlorine-free
(TCF). It meets the minimum requirements of ansi/niso z39.48-1992
(r 1997) (Permanence of Paper).8
Contents




      List of Illustrations                                     vii

      Acknowledgments                                            ix

      Prologue: Sun the Perfected One’s Song of Guarding Life   xiii

      introduction                                                1

 1.   “conquering the one hundred diseases”:
      weisheng before the twentieth century                      22

 2.   health and disease in heaven’s ford                        48

 3.   medical encounters and divergences                         76

 4.   translating weisheng in treaty-port china                 104

 5.   transforming eisei in meiji japan                         136

 6.   deficiency and sovereignty:
      hygienic modernity in the occupation
      of tianjin, 1900–1902                                     165

 7.   seen and unseen: the urban landscape
      and boundaries of weisheng                                193

 8.   weisheng and the desire for modernity                     225

 9.   japanese management of germs in tianjin                   254

10.   germ warfare and patriotic weisheng                       285

      conclusion                                                300

      Glossary                                                  307

      Notes                                                     319

      Bibliography                                              365

      Index                                                     397
Introduction




The goal of this book is to place meanings of health and disease at the cen-
ter of Chinese experiences of modernity. It does so by focusing on the mul-
tiple manifestations across time of a single Chinese word: weisheng. Today
this term is variously rendered into English as “hygiene,” “sanitary,”
“health,” or “public health.” Before the nineteenth century, weisheng was
associated with a variety of regimens of diet, meditation, and self-medica-
tion that were practiced by the individual in order to guard fragile internal
vitalities. With the arrival of armed imperialism, some of the most funda-
mental debates about how China and the Chinese could achieve a modern
existence began to coalesce strongly around this word. Its meaning shifted
away from Chinese cosmology and moved to encompass state power, sci-
entiﬁc standards of progress, the cleanliness of bodies, and the ﬁtness of races.
The persistent association of weisheng with questions of China’s place in
the modern world has inspired me to translate it as “hygienic modernity.”
This study illuminates how weisheng transformed a city, and how it became
a central term through which Chinese elites “named the conditions of their
existence” under foreign imperialism in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries.1
   In today’s People’s Republic of China (PRC) it is impossible not to no-
tice weisheng. The word is a pervasive adjective/noun that fails to be con-
tained by any one-to-one correspondence with the word hygiene. One may
encounter weisheng chopsticks (made of cheap wood, wrapped in paper, and
designed for one use only), weisheng paper (toilet paper), and weisheng
spheres, or mothballs. One can “do weisheng” (daosao weisheng or gao
weisheng), which means to accomplish a thorough cleaning at home or in
the workplace. The bathrooms in private homes and toilets in public spaces
are referred to as weisheng rooms (weisheng jian). The national govern-

                                                                               1
2     /     Introduction

ment bureau that oversees the medical profession, hospitals, epidemic con-
trol, and pharmaceutical standards is called the Ministry of Weisheng. Mu-
nicipalities and counties have their own Bureau of Weisheng responsible
for the public health in each locale. Although in many occurrences weisheng
can (and should) be translated simply as “hygiene/hygienic” or “sanitation/
sanitary,” its pervasive presence in Chinese society indicates a signiﬁcance
beyond the mere concern for cleanliness that is conveyed by these terms in
contemporary American English.
    It is perhaps its frequent use in conjunction with “the people,” cities, and
even the nation that weisheng reveals itself as a central part of contempo-
rary China’s struggle to achieve what seems to be an ever-elusive state of
modernity. Frequent municipal campaigns urge the public to “pay attention
to weisheng” (jiang weisheng), reminding people that in a modern society,
people wash their hands, keep their dwellings clean, and most important,
refrain from spitting in public. Slogans painted on walls and buildings urge
residents to create “civilized and hygienic cities” (wenming weisheng cheng-
shi) as part of the policy of reforming the country and opening up to the
outside world (gaige kaifang). In conversations with Chinese of a certain
educational background, one might encounter an admiration for Singapore
because it is weisheng and a general sense of dissatisfaction with China be-
cause it is not. And although most mass mobilization campaigns have dis-
sipated in the post-Deng era, the government still regularly coordinates na-
tionwide Patriotic Hygiene Campaigns (Aiguo weisheng yundong) as a
method of improving China’s health, appearance, and national status. In
these manifestations, weisheng is a central element in the deﬁnition of
modernity, not only for the individual but also for the built environment
of cities and even for the imagined totality of the nation. The meanings of
this “hygiene” go far beyond anything ever associated with the word be-
fore the late nineteenth century.
    This study seeks to understand the process through which these novel
meanings became associated with the term weisheng. Understanding this
process may shed new light on the underlying nature of social and intel-
lectual change in urban China in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
John Fitzgerald has described how national elites in the twentieth century
undertook a project of “awakening” China from a condition of national sub-
jugation, a condition that elites perceived as stemming from weaknesses in-
herent in the Chinese themselves.2 This study suggests that much of this
awakening project was centered on the term weisheng. In the ﬁrst decades
of the twentieth century, Chinese elites accepted a medicalized view of their
country’s problems and embraced a medicalized solution for the deﬁcien-
                                                      Introduction       /     3

cies of both the Chinese state and the Chinese body. Focusing on medical
developments in one treaty-port city, this study considers the century-long
process of how health and disease emerged as a discursive center of Chi-
nese deﬁciency under conditions of imperialism and traces speciﬁc projects
of “awakening” the Chinese nation, race, and body to a state of corporal
modernity.3
    One of my main goals is to locate changing meanings of health within
the urban environments that helped generate those meanings. The early
twentieth century saw an outpouring of writings on health and hygiene, but
these works were produced by people who lived in environments that en-
compassed epidemics, graveyards, ﬂoods, marketplaces, streets, temples,
brothels, and foreigners. In order to capture this context, I focus on one
locale: the northern treaty-port city of Tianjin, which was (and still is) a
bustling city, one of China’s largest. From 1860 to 1943, the city was also a
remarkable example of a treaty port, divided into a Chinese-administered
zone and as many as nine different foreign concessions. The resulting mul-
tiplicity of boundaries, architectures, government policies, and interactions
among Chinese and foreigners embodied China’s unique experience under
imperialism—at once not a colony, yet still the site of multiple colonialisms.
Tianjin provides the perfect setting for the study of the condition that has
been called “semicolonialism.”4
    Setting this study in one locale also facilitates the creation of a narrative
of change over time. Tianjin experienced highly signiﬁcant moments of en-
counter and inﬂuence in the course of its long history as a treaty port: the
arrival of “Western medicine” with the British navy in 1858, the occupa-
tion by foreign forces in 1900 and the Qing recovery of the city in 1902, the
Japanese occupation of the city in the 1930s and 1940s. This study narrates
the intersections between these political events and the transformation of
practices related to health—taking medicine, drinking water, arranging
space, managing excreta. Within this narrative, I remain sensitive to how
elites imbued these changes with a signiﬁcance that went well beyond their
quotidian effects. Overall, a local history approach facilitates the simulta-
neous consideration of both the mundane (if not the profane) and the sub-
lime: it investigates where people went to the bathroom as well as how people
envisioned the nation. This study tries to ﬁnd the meaningful connections
between the two.
    The task of connecting the privy to the nation through the thread of hy-
gienic modernity involves several stages and touches upon several differ-
ent scholarships. The ﬁrst challenge is to place the shift to hygienic moder-
nity within the context of the history of medicine in general and the history
4      /    Introduction

of colonial medicine in particular.The shift away from old meanings of health
and hygiene was a global phenomenon, but one with speciﬁc meanings for
societies under colonialism. The second task is to consider how hygienic
modernity altered urban landscapes—both material and human—as it be-
came a marker of civilization and sovereignty. Finally translations of texts
helped produce new meanings of health and hygiene not by bringing to-
gether two monolithic cultures or transferring an absolute science from one
language to another but by negotiating meanings between two languages
at highly speciﬁc moments in the histories of local sciences and local soci-
eties. This tale of health and disease in a Chinese treaty port rests at the in-
tersection of three scholarships: the history of medicine, urban history, and
translation studies.



the (global) transformation of hygiene
and the rise of (chinese) deficiency
In 1220, Genghis Khan sent his personal minister, Liu Wen, accompanied
by twenty warriors and bearing a golden tablet in the shape of a tiger’s head,
to summon a Daoist master named Qiu Changchun from his home temple
in Shandong province. After an exceedingly dangerous and expensive jour-
ney covering thousands of miles, the Daoist master ﬁnally found himself
face to face with the Mongol conqueror in the imperial tents at Samarkand.
According to one of Changchun’s disciples, their initial conversation went
something like this:
    the emperor asked: “Perfected One, what Medicine of Immortality
                       (chang sheng zhi yao) have you brought me from
                       afar?”
    the master replied: “I possess the Way of Guarding Life (wei sheng
                        zhi dao), but no medicine that will prolong life
                        (chang sheng zhi yao).”5
   It is not surprising that Genghis’s ﬁrst question to Changchun is about
an elixir of immortality, or chang sheng zhi yao. By the thirteenth century
there already existed a millennium’s worth of history and folktales about
emperors who sought the secrets of physical transcendence from Daoist ad-
visors. In his project of building a great Eurasian empire, it was only natu-
ral that Genghis Khan would try to bring China’s most valuable strategic
resources under his command—including the knowledge that might enable
him to live, if not forever, then certainly for a very long time. In response
to this query, Changchun the Perfected One boldly puns on the emperor’s
                                                      Introduction       /     5

words, replying that although there is no drug (yao) that can chang sheng
( literally, lengthen life), there is, however, a Way (Dao) that can wei sheng
( literally, guard life). The Daoist master offers a regimen that could
strengthen the body’s resistance to illness, reduce the effects of aging, and
help the Khan live out the number of years allotted him by Heaven.
Changchun warns Genghis Khan about the dangers of sex (“Try sleeping
alone for one month; you will be surprised what an improvement there
will be in your spirits and energy”), outlines the beneﬁts of a simple diet
harmonized with the seasons, and extols the virtues of quiet meditation.6
This, in essence, was a summary of a Chinese path to hygiene, the Dao of
weisheng.
     As illustrated in the classic tale of Changchun the Perfected One, wei-
sheng was once a conﬁdent Chinese “Way of Guarding Life,” a set of ad-
vanced hygiene techniques closely associated with Chinese culture and cov-
eted by foreign powers. By the twentieth century, however, weisheng was
deployed as a discourse of Chinese deﬁciency: a gauge that measured the
distance that lay between China and a foreign-deﬁned modernity. In the
twentieth century, meanings of weisheng changed to encompass modern bio-
medicine, public health, and personal decorum. In the writings about
weisheng by Chinese elites in the twentieth century there was an explicit
understanding that Chinese were not as clean, not as organized, not as dis-
ciplined, and not as healthy as an imagined West. The present study traces
the irony and historical signiﬁcance embodied in this linguistic shift.
     Certainly China was not the only place where the content of “hygiene”
changed in the modern era. Andrew Wear has pointed out that the mean-
ing of the word hygiene in Europe also underwent a radical change during
the nineteenth century. From antiquity to the early modern era, hygiene
encompassed a wide variety of health-giving practices such as exercise, diet,
and rest. Today, Wear observes, “Hygiene means cleanliness, and its scope
is narrower.”7 Shifts in the meaning of hygiene in the West and China were
similar, but they had profoundly different social and political implications
in the two places.
     Changchun’s weisheng advice to Genghis Khan bore distinct similarities
to a classical Western view of hygiene. The Daoist master warned the Mon-
gol to moderate his diet, to act according to the seasons, and to limit his sex-
ual activities. Hippocratic treatises such as Regimen in Health (ﬁfth cen-
tury b.c.e.) called upon individuals to alter their patterns of eating, drinking,
sleeping, and activity according to the seasons and according to their own
bodily constitutions. These writings outlined the different natures of food
and medicines, prescribed general times for baths, and recommended pa-
6     /     Introduction

rameters for frequency of sexual intercourse, much as the Daoist adept ad-
vised Genghis Khan. The second-century Roman physician Galen advised
moderation in exercise, diet, and drink in his treatise De sanitate tuenda
(Hygiene). In Ars medica (Art of medicine), Galen identiﬁed the six cate-
gories of air, food and drink, sleep and waking, movement and rest, reten-
tion and evacuations, and the passions of the soul as the major external fac-
tors that inﬂuenced health, elements that later became the cornerstones of
hygiene known as the “six nonnaturals.” Moderation and seasonality were
the watchwords of this hygiene philosophy. Consistent adherence to wis-
dom laid out by the Greeks and Romans typiﬁed writings on the mainte-
nance of health from the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. The early mod-
ern period saw a ﬂourishing of hygiene advice books, some of which offered
variations in time-honored regimens, but scholars have argued that into the
eighteenth century there was very little departure from the holistic ap-
proaches to hygiene set out by Galen.8
    Radical departures in approaches to health emerged in the eighteenth cen-
tury with the development of a “public hygiene” in France, England, and
Prussia. In the minds of some administrators, intellectuals, and revolution-
aries, the most important health was the health of the nation. It was the job
of the government to prevent diseases of the national body through sani-
tary policing, public works, and state-sponsored medical institutions.9 At the
same time, hygiene became more associated with cleanliness, manners, and
class status. A concern about cleanliness was later augmented by a fear of
germs.10 By the mid–twentieth century, the fractured nature of health was
symbolized in English through use of different words that constituted two
worlds: an expansive realm of public health and a narrow realm of personal
hygiene. The conceptual basis for holistic approaches to health—a concern
with humors and seasons—had essentially disappeared, and there was no
longer any single word that could convey a path to health through diet, ex-
ercise, rest, and moderation.
    These transitions have garnered relatively little attention from histori-
ans of Western medical traditions. In his many studies of popular percep-
tions of health and healing, Roy Porter highlighted the perpetuation of be-
liefs about humors and balance among patients in the eighteenth century,
even as physicians began to shift away from Galenic views of the body.11
Charles Rosenberg and others have noted how American physicians were
reluctant to jettison humors and holistic approaches to therapy in the nine-
teenth century, in spite of the inﬂuence of Paris medicine and the rise of the
germ theory of disease in Germany.12 But for the most part these phenom-
ena were thought of as transitional moments, as lag times between a tradi-
                                                     Introduction       /     7

tional past and an inevitable achievement of medical modernity. Medical an-
thropologists have questioned the thoroughness of this transition among
the lay populace, while historians of the “medical fringe” have highlighted
nineteenth-century movements that resisted the growing hegemony of
“medical orthodoxy.” 13 But overall, the historian’s focus on “the rise of mod-
ern medicine” (particularly modern therapeutics) has resulted in an over-
all disregard of the history of preventive medicine and changes in general
conceptualizations of health. Through routine exposure of the masses to
modern biomedicine and the public health apparatus of the state, older ap-
proaches to hygiene in the West seem to have faded away with little
difﬁculty, little complaint, and with few consequences to the society as a
whole.
    Scholarship on the history of health and medicine in non-European so-
cieties is not as sanguine. Many scholars of “colonial medicine” have dwelt
on the shock and displacement that European approaches to health and heal-
ing brought to indigenous societies.14 The classical study in this vein is David
Arnold’s 1993 work, Colonizing the Body. Arnold highlights the “corpo-
ral” aspects of British colonialism as British administrators counted, quar-
antined, vaccinated, and inspected Indian bodies. Particularly during out-
breaks of epidemic disease such as bubonic plague, Western medicine and
Western methods of disease prevention appear as an “assault on the body,”
a violent and coercive corporal colonization carried out in the name of mod-
ern health and hygiene. Other scholars, most notably Megan Vaughan and
Warwick Anderson, have similarly emphasized colonial medicine’s violent
interventions in Africa and Southeast Asia, as British missionaries or
American troops scrutinized the blood and fecal matter of indigenous pop-
ulations. Here the focus has been on the development of Western discourses
that turned indigenous peoples into diseased and chaotic medical objects,
and the coercive techniques used to act upon native bodies as objects.15
Arnold also sees the Indian body as a site of “contestation and not just colo-
nial appropriation,” as indigenous people protested and resisted the inter-
ventions of colonial medicine. He suggests, however, that Western medicine
became “part of a new cultural hegemony and incipient political order” as
it “inﬁltrated the lives of an inﬂuential section of the Indian population,”
although in this work he is more interested in charting the intent of the col-
onizers and the reactions of the “masses” than exploring the adoption of
Western medicine by Indian elites.16
    Other scholars have acknowledged the violence and interventions of colo-
nial public health but chose to emphasize instead the ability of indigenous
populations to appropriate and refashion the concepts of health and disease
8     /     Introduction

brought by colonizers. Indigenous elites “contested colonial hegemony” and
turned colonial medicine into “contested knowledge” by producing hybrid
forms of medicine, or by ﬁnding within their own traditions the basis to
launch critiques of Western medical systems.17 These contestations and com-
binations often took place through the process of translation. In an insightful
study, Bridie Andrews has demonstrated that Chinese physicians translated
information about bacteria and the germ theory of disease within a Chinese
framework, linguistically conceptualizing germs as akin to other discrete,
animal-like pathogens already prevalent in popular concepts of disease eti-
ology.18 Gyan Prakash has highlighted how Indian elites, through the
process of translation, questioned whether Western science had a monop-
oly on the truth, particularly truths about the functioning of the body.19
Ashis Nandy has highlighted how Gandhi and others accomplished a deep
critique of Western medicine by turning to Indian philosophies of health.20
In all these cases, indigenous actors shaped and questioned Western knowl-
edge from a position ﬁrmly grounded in strong indigenous practices of
health, healing, and hygiene.
   Both of these general trends of “colonizing the body” and “contesting
colonial hegemony” are present in the Chinese experience of Western ap-
proaches to health and the body in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
There were numerous moments when colonizers “touched the body” and
enforced coercive regimes of medical control on an unwilling populace. Chi-
nese medical thinkers also creatively used Chinese health concepts to chal-
lenge and reformulate Western concepts. However, certain general trends
become more apparent when one looks at a speciﬁc setting across long pe-
riods of time. Many studies focus on isolated moments of “encounter” be-
tween European medicine and indigenous medicine: a speciﬁc set of trans-
lations, a particular epidemic, or the thought of one individual at the height
of his inﬂuence. In part as a result of their limited time frame, they empha-
size signiﬁcant moments of resistance and agency. The present study
attempts a more holistic approach to the history of health and hygiene by
considering multiple actors, a complex urban setting, and a period of ap-
proximately one hundred years. This approach deconstructs the monolith
of “Western medicine” and captures its transformations and multiple
manifestations in both the metropole and abroad. It reveals moments when
indigenous elites challenged and reformulated what they perceived as the
errors in Western concepts of health and disease. Most important, it con-
veys the ﬂuctuations in imperialism’s character across time and space, high-
lights moments of cooperation as well as coercion, and looks at the some-
                                                     Introduction       /     9

times intimate collaborations between multiple “colonizers” and various
members of “the colonized.”
   In spite of these ﬂuctuations and moments of resistance, however, the re-
sulting overall picture reveals a growing hegemony of biomedical ap-
proaches to health in the public discourse of Chinese elites, and a concur-
rent acceptance of a picture of the Chinese people as inherently lacking when
compared with Western-deﬁned standards of health. Weisheng as hygienic
modernity becomes a deﬁnitive example of a “derivative discourse” of na-
tionalism, one based on an argument of native deﬁciency originally devised
by colonial powers.21 In China, few if any alternative voices emerged from
the treaty-port elite to challenge its underlying power.
   The historical development of biomedical discourses of deﬁciency has be-
gun to concern scholars of colonial medicine. Ann Laura Stoler has traced
how the project of creating a bourgeois society in Europe relied upon mark-
ing distinctions and establishing boundaries between colonizer and colonized
outside of Europe.22 Mark Harrison has suggested that a rise in a European
mentality that thought of many Indians as inherently diseased and deﬁcient
accompanied the erosion of an “optimism about acclimatization and the col-
onization of India” after 1800. The belief that whites could not adjust to a
pathogenic Indian environment “was closely related to the emergence of
ideas of race and the consolidation of colonial rule.”23 What survived into
the twentieth century, even after the environment was no longer seen as a
major cause of disease, was the notion that ‘“natives’” themselves produced
disease through inherent deﬁciencies of body and behavior. The rise in the
germ theory of disease accentuated this tendency to locate disease within
the inherent “racial” habits of indigenous populations.24
   Although scholars have been working on connecting the shifts in con-
cepts of health, race, and class that occurred within the West to the same
changing formulations that occurred in the colonies, to date no truly syn-
thetic work has emerged.25 Warwick Anderson has suggested that scholars
of medical history undertake a truly postcolonial history of medicine by ex-
ploring the ways in which modern biomedicine has acted as a colonizing
force on the body in the West, not only in the colonies.26 A global history
of changing concepts of hygiene would provide fruitful terrain for such an
endeavor.27 The present study, however, is unabashedly about meanings of
health and daily life in a Chinese treaty port: I will leave any exposé of the
colonizing nature of modern biomedicine in the West to scholars who spe-
cialize in that particular region of the globe. This study does, however, strive
to place the global within the local. It is highly aware of how Chinese,
10     /      Introduction

through interaction with representatives of multiple colonialisms/medicines
(French, British, German, Japanese, and American), changed the meaning
of health in a city that was one of the major crossroads of imperialism.



tianjin, hypercolony, and semicolonialism
Situating this investigation in one of China’s largest and most complex
treaty ports helps to illuminate how foreign and indigenous actors reshaped
approaches to health under the conditions of China’s ‘“semicolonialism.’”
I have chosen the former treaty-port city of Tianjin, in northern China,
as the anchor for my study. This local narrative approach has many advan-
tages. It allows us to imagine how people might have perceived the beneﬁts
and dangers of their speciﬁc environment: the mists rising from marshes,
the intense heat of the summer sun, the taste of brackish water from a well
dug in salty soil. It allows us to ask certain concrete questions about the re-
lationship between disease and society: When did epidemics run through the
city, and how did people make sense of them? How did different groups—
administrators, physicians, lay people—respond to these speciﬁc chal-
lenges? How did class differences, regional differences, and migration af-
fect approaches to health? By grounding a study of health in one place, we
can better visualize the texture of life experienced by both physicians and
sufferers. A local history may seem constrained and narrow, but within a
single locale the rich details of everyday life appear more vibrant and more
meaningful.
    As a single locale, Tianjin is by no means insigniﬁcant. Tianjin is China’s
third largest city, and its population of close to six million people makes it
one of the largest cities in the world. I initially chose Tianjin as the site for
my study because it is the home to some of China’s most important med-
ical “ﬁrsts.” Tianjin was the ﬁrst Chinese city to have a native-administered
municipal department of health (1902), founded during the New Reforms
period under Yuan Shikai. Tianjin was also home to the ﬁrst government
hospital of Western medicine in China: the Beiyang Medical Academy,
founded by British missionaries in 1880 and taken over by the Qing gov-
ernment in 1888. But what makes these medical “ﬁrsts” even more inter-
esting is the unique setting of foreign and Chinese interaction in which they
took place.
    From 1860 to 1945,Tianjin was home to as many as eight different foreign
concessions, the most of any Chinese treaty port. Shanghai, China’s most
famous treaty port, had two foreign zones, the French Concession and the
                                                  Introduction       /     11

International Settlement (primarily British). Tianjin, however, contained
a Japanese, French, British, German, Belgian, Russian, Austro-Hungarian,
and Italian Concession. Eventually only the Japanese, French, British, and
Italian Concessions lasted beyond World War I, but in the ﬁrst decades of
the twentieth century, Tianjin could be viewed as a “hypercolony,” a
chaotic crossroads of Chinese and foreigners and a booming showcase of
imperialism.28
   I have coined the term hypercolony from Sun Yat-sen’s famous for-
mulation of China as a “hypo-colony.” Sun claimed that semicolonial, the
term that many used to describe China’s condition of not being a total colony,
simply meant that China was partially colonized by a large assortment of
foreign powers. Borrowing the term ci (hypo-) from chemistry, Sun de-
scribed China’s status as that of a ci zhimindi, a “hypo-colony,” a weak na-
tion that had more difﬁculty developing identity and a sense of unity than
“true” colonies such as Korea or Vietnam.29 The ironic implication of Sun’s
statement is that China would have been better off colonized by only one
foreign nation, a conclusion at odds with my appreciation of the com-
plexities of Tianjin’s political and cultural circumstances at the turn of the
century.
   By suggesting that Tianjin could be described as a “hypercolony,” I am
not seeking to generate a new theoretical model: I am simply drawing at-
tention to the potential implications that arise when one urban space is di-
vided among multiple imperialisms. Tianjin’s status as a hypercolony placed
Chinese urban dwellers under the gaze—and sometimes the control—of
several different imperial powers. At the same time, this condition offered
Chinese a perspective on several variant models of urban modernity and
colonial ideology. The presence of multiple imperialisms inﬂuenced the im-
perialists as well. The close juxtaposition of so many settlements within one
urban space affected the practices and self-representations of the foreign
powers at the local level. This became particularly important for the large
Japanese Concession that was literally and ﬁguratively positioned between
the Chinese city and the European concessions. Each concession had to rep-
resent and negotiate its identity on the ground vis-à-vis other imperial pow-
ers. They did so through the deployment of architecture, the creation of
speciﬁc forms of local administration, and by creating different policies gov-
erning the Chinese who made up the vast majority of residents in each con-
cession. This study explores how health and hygiene became an important
strategy in these imperial representations.
   The search for a term that adequately captures the complexity of China’s
experience with colonialism has captivated many scholars of modern Chi-
12     /      Introduction

nese history. Recent work has taken up the previously disfavored Marxist
term semicolonial, seeking to outline its contours and contrast it with the
purely colonial, represented primarily by scholarship on India. As semi-
colonialism has been put back to work, much has been required of it. The
term must suggest at the same time the incompleteness of a colonizing
process in China as well as the effects of having multiple colonizers within
China’s borders. Shu-mei Shih, in her sophisticated study of the relation-
ship of Chinese writers to imperialism and modernity, has employed semi-
colonial to mean “the multiple, layered, intensiﬁed, as well as incomplete
and fragmentary nature of China’s colonial structure.”30 The term is sup-
posed to suggest that the foreign presence in China was scant but also po-
tentially oppressive: China’s cup of imperialism was at times less than half
full, but at other times it overﬂowed.
    In spite of a recognition of this paradox, scholars have tended to use the
term semicolonialism to emphasize the “half-full” nature of the foreign
presence in China. To explain why so many Chinese intellectuals seemed to
embrace modernity without ambivalence (in contrast with India), Shu-mei
Shih ﬁnds that the incomplete nature of foreign administration “afforded
Chinese intellectuals more varied ideological, political, and cultural positions
than in formal colonies.” Foreign powers in China not only “lack[ed] sys-
tematic institutional infrastructure,” they also did not “impose a colonial
epistemology by force.”31 Bryna Goodman has suggested a spectrum of
approaches to the question of power and imperialism in China’s modern
history.32 At one end Goodman places scholarship, such as recent Chinese
studies of treaty ports, that emphasizes reciprocity between Chinese and
foreigners and “tends to downplay the prejudices and power differentials
of semicolonialism.” At another end she places studies by Tani Barlow and
other scholars afﬁliated with the journal positions who, according to Good-
man, overemphasize the extreme violence and dominance of the foreign
presence in China and do not distinguish between colonialism and semi-
colonialism. Following Jürgen Osterhammel, Goodman calls for a scholar-
ship on semicolonialism that avoids the extremes of mutual beneﬁt and to-
tal domination by mapping “when, where, how, and to what effect did which
extraneous forces impinge on Chinese life.”33 However, Goodman, like Shih,
is suspicious of approaches that emphasize foreign violence or characterize
the foreign presence as a powerful threat to China’s sovereignty. For her
study of late nineteenth century Shanghai, she ﬁnds Chinese in conﬁdent
positions vis-à-vis foreigners, able to conduct negotiations and appropria-
tions in a relatively unconstrained political environment. Foreign violence
may have opened the treaty ports, but this violence is a vague memory that
                                                  Introduction       /     13

does not affect the everyday interactions between foreigners and Chinese
in Shanghai.
   By narrating the changing concepts of health within the speciﬁc setting
of Tianjin, this study attempts to pinpoint “when, where, how, and to what
effect” foreign forces “impinged on Chinese life.” The result suggests that
no one treaty-port history can stand in for all the others, and that semi-
colonialism is not an adequate term to capture the complexity of the one-
hundred-year history of imperialism in China. There are distinct differences
in the intensity, power, and violence of the foreign presence over time and
from place to place. This variation is not only present in the social and eco-
nomic realms, but is tremendously evident in a “cultural” realm like con-
ceptions of health and disease. The violent battles of imperialism, perhaps
nothing more than a vague memory for Shanghai, had visited the north-
ern city of Tianjin several times in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
Perhaps in other locales, foreigners “lack[ed] systematic institutional in-
frastructure” and did not “impose a colonial epistemology by force.” The
Chinese city of Tianjin, however, had been ruled for two years by an inter-
national army that enforced new ways of behavior at gunpoint. This occu-
pying force also determined the conditions under which the indigenous gov-
ernment could regain its sovereignty over Tianjin, and thus radically shaped
the native government of the city after reversion.
   Scholars have also suggested that the lack of foreign dominance and vi-
olence in Chinese treaty ports is what allowed Chinese intellectuals to turn
a blind eye to the imperialist constructs of modernity. In contrast, what is
most striking about Tianjin is how Chinese elites were quite willing to em-
brace a foreign-deﬁned modernity—particularly its aspects related to
public health and hygiene—at the very height of imperialist violence and
coercion and to extend that embrace once the violence ended. To use a for-
mulation proposed by Shih, Tianjin’s elites seemed to accomplish the bi-
furcations (separating modernity from imperialism) and suppressions (sup-
pressing the racist hierarchies implicit in modernity) required to embrace
modernity, but they did so under surprisingly contradictory conditions of
both “colonial” coercion and “ semicolonial” sovereignty.
   A focus on Tianjin helps to shed light on this complex process by fore-
grounding the crucial mediating role played by Japan. In the scramble for
concessions unleashed by the suppression of the Boxer Uprising in 1900,
Japan appeared simultaneously as an invading foreign power and as a
brother. For most of the period of this study, Japan served as a model of a
successful “Asian modernity” that could serve as a bridge to modernity for
China. From the perspective of many Tianjin elites, Japan was a force that
14     /      Introduction

could bring order, rationality, and health to a subaltern society that had be-
come unmanageable. If the history of hygienic modernity is essentially the
story of the adoption by Chinese elites of a technology of imperialism, that
adoption was facilitated by the presence of Japan.
   Japan’s role becomes particularly apparent when one looks at efforts and
ideas surrounding weisheng. The word weisheng as “hygienic modernity”
was itself the creation of Japanese physicians who used an ancient Chinese
term to translate European concepts of national health. After the suppres-
sion of the Boxer Uprising, Japanese advisors helped create Tianjin’s sani-
tary police force, military medical school, and its ﬁrst department of health.
Tianjin was home to the most important formal Japanese Concession in
China proper—Mark Peattie has called it “the jewel of Japan’s privileged
territories in China”—and as a result, tens of thousands of Chinese lived
daily life under Japanese hygienic administration.34 Finally, the Japanese oc-
cupation of the city (1937–45) brought a type of hygienic modernity to Tian-
jin that was to have a profound inﬂuence on the city long after the Japanese
empire had disappeared. Grounding a study of changing meanings of health
in the city of Tianjin highlights the important role of Japan in the forma-
tion of Chinese modernity.
   Setting this study in Tianjin also provides an opportunity to recreate the
past of a Chinese city, with its smells, foods, street life, and sufferings. In
some ways this study adopts a Foucault-inspired approach to history: It gen-
erates a genealogy of a discourse and shows how that discourse acquired a
powerful ability to deﬁne the conditions of existence in the modern world.
However, I am not of the belief that discourses speak for themselves. What
a person sees out his window, what temples he frequents, how he gets his
drinking water, what epidemics he fears, and how many times he is vacci-
nated by soldiers are all important details that contribute to our under-
standing of how health and disease were interpreted in the past. Through
recourse to narrative, this study seeks to highlight the way daily life con-
tributes to the authorship of historical meaning.35 Ultimately, I take the cre-
ation of historicity to be one of the more important and pleasurable tasks
of the historian. Perhaps it also allows me to indulge in a certain kind of
nostalgia for a lost Tianjin, one ﬁlled with active temples, its streets alive
with multiple manifestations of social and economic life.36
   Finally, delving into the lives and settings of local actors helps to rectify
a particularly obvious gap in studies of colonial medicine by offering a more
nuanced picture of indigenous society. Previous works have emphasized the
intent of the colonizer, while the thoughts and intentions of the colonized
                                                     Introduction       /      15

have remained obscure. Some recent studies on health and medicine in Asia
and Africa under colonialism have focused on meanings generated by in-
digenous actors.37 The Chinese case is greatly aided by the presence of vo-
luminous writings by indigenous elites and by the existence of a massive
(though not always accessible) archive generated by indigenous govern-
ments. By understanding foreign views of health and healing as a form of
“contested knowledge” that is evaluated by multiple actors from a variety
of subject positions, we can better understand processes of appropriation
without attributing all outcomes either to the inherent superiority of West-
ern knowledge or the quaint resistances of cultural conservatives. At the
same time, however, it is essential to remain sensitive to the ways that im-
perialism has inexorably altered both the terms and the conditions of life
in modern China.



language, translation, and visions of health
Readers unfamiliar with Chinese or Japanese may ﬁnd it strange that I use
the Chinese word weisheng (Japanese, eisei) throughout this study. This is
not because weisheng, like some mystical Chinese concept, is impossible to
translate into English. From the mid-nineteenth to the mid-twentieth cen-
turies, weisheng is, in fact, eminently translatable into many different words
and phrases—health, hygienic, physiology, nutrition, clean, medicine, pro-
tecting internal vitalities, sanitary science, promoting fertility, public health,
and conquering death, to name a few—and therein lies the problem. Ulti-
mately the word refers to the actions that humans can take to ensure health.
This may be loosely conveyed with the English word hygiene. Yet the mean-
ing of the English word hygiene has certainly changed over time in Europe
and United States over the past two centuries. To settle on a one-to-one cor-
respondence between weisheng and hygiene would run the risk of both freez-
ing its meaning across time and denying the possibility that the word could
have multiple meanings at the same time. I take care to suggest what I think
weisheng means to different people at different junctures, but I often leave
the term untranslated in order to suggest that it is a vessel into which nu-
merous meanings are poured. This book seeks to understand how Chinese
in various circles brought their own understanding of health and disease to
the construction of “hygienic modernity,” a process that Lydia Liu has called
“translingual practice.”38
   Weisheng provides an ideal case study of translingual practice for a va-
16     /     Introduction

riety of reasons. First, because we have an account of the “birth” of the term
in its modern guise from a Japanese physician/bureaucrat, Nagayo Sensai,
who claimed to have taken a term from an ancient Daoist text and used it
to translate a matrix of European words that suggested both the govern-
ment management of the people’s health and the creation of hygienically
disciplined citizens.39 This moment of translation in Japan is crucial to un-
derstanding the nature of weisheng in China in the twentieth century. Na-
gayo Sensai’s translation demonstrates how Meiji medical elites realized that
technologies of medicine, surveillance, and policing were central to the Eu-
ropean blueprint for modernity. In an uncanny way, Nagayo Sensai (and
East Asian modernizers after him) used the single term weisheng (Japanese,
eisei) to encompass what Foucault termed “bio-power,” a series of techniques
through which the state undertakes the administration of life, and “gov-
ernmentality,” the idea that individuals internalize disciplinary regimes and
thus harmonize their own behaviors with the goals of the state.40 I am not
suggesting that Nagayo Sensai was anticipating Foucault. However, Japa-
nese elites, engaged in their own quest to order society, quickly grasped some
of the core elements that made Europe appear modern and sought to em-
ploy them as “full kits” to transform their own societies. Japanese elites then
transferred this impulse to China. Therefore, although this study is focused
on Tianjin, it dedicates a separate chapter to a consideration of the context
of weisheng’s signiﬁcant transformation in Meiji Japan.
   That moment of translation was only the beginning of the term’s con-
tentious circulation. What would the term weisheng mean to a Chinese man
in the late Qing who was well versed in the classics but who had never been
to London or Berlin? How was the meaning of the word shaped through
acts of translation, acts of administration, or acts of consumption? Did it be-
have like an oddly familiar “returned graphic loan” or a startling neologism,
and at what point did it assert a natural presence within the lexicon? 41 And
what were the implications for a society that felt at home with a word that
was both native and alien at the same time? This study seeks to embed lan-
guage and translation within the social struggles and intellectual accidents
that gave rise to both a new language and a new way of being in twentieth-
century China.
   The advantages of pursuing translation studies have become evident to
many scholars of China in the past several years, but the approach contains
several pitfalls.42 Preeminent among them is that texts might be mistaken
for civilizations, and variations in meaning generated through the process
of translation might be mistaken for an incommensurability between civi-
lizations.43 There is a danger, particularly in exploration of science transla-
                                                  Introduction       /     17

tions, of assuming that a single text represents “Western medicine,” or that
the translator represents a monolithic “Chinese tradition.” Perhaps the most
important strategy for avoiding false “East/West” dichotomies is to pay
attention to change over time not only in China, but also in the various
imperial powers under consideration. We must not assume that the West
(and Japan) provided an unchanging standard of scientiﬁc modernity for
China. This study has not one, but as many as four “moving targets.” Im-
mense changes in medicine, hygiene, and public health not only occurred
in China, but in Europe, the United States, and Japan as well during the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries. These ideas were not imported sui
generis into China, but were introduced into speciﬁc locales by speciﬁc
agents, some of whom had their own eccentric beliefs and agendas. Trac-
ing speciﬁc aspects of Western medicine as they were encountered by Chi-
nese not only helps to debunk the idea that Western concepts of health and
disease were inherently superior, it also reveals the surprising similarities
between certain Chinese and Western approaches to health at different his-
torical junctures.
    There is a danger that the single-minded pursuit of one word might
narrow the ﬁeld of inquiry and even produce historical inaccuracies. For ex-
ample, in the present study, I observe that before the twentieth century con-
cepts such as “the public” and “impurity” were rarely if ever associated with
the term weisheng. However, this does not mean that concepts such as the
government responsibility for health, environmental sanitation, or personal
cleanliness did not exist in China before the arrival of European imperial-
ism. The scholarship of several historians of premodern China has demon-
strated that these things most surely did exist. Ancient dynasties appointed
imperial health ofﬁcers to treat the diseases of the people. Medical educa-
tion was supported and regulated by the court at various points in China’s
history. Concepts of miasma and impurities associated with environments
were widespread.The Chinese bathed—probably more often than Europeans
before the early modern period—and they even used soap.44
    The difference between premodern and modern Chinese concepts of
health is that before the arrival of European (and Japanese) imperialism,
these various practices were dispersed through the cultural terrain and had
little if any relation to one single term. There was no clear sense that prac-
tices as disparate as brushing teeth and regulating medical education should
somehow be grouped together, nor was there a sense that these practices, as
an aggregate object, could be used as a symbol of civilization or difference.
It was the arrival of foreign imperialism and European-Japanese conceptu-
alizations of health that resulted in the creation of a discourse of weisheng,
18     /     Introduction

bringing together public and private meanings of health into a powerful
model of modernity. A focus on the word weisheng, rather than conveying
continuities with the ancient Chinese past, reveals ruptures and reconﬁgu-
rations of conceptions of health and disease, worked out along stress lines
that were created by the presence of violent foreign imperialism. This study
does not hold that diverse “modern” hygienic practices did not exist in the
Chinese past. Instead it contends that a radically new weisheng emerged in
the twentieth century, one that did things it never did before: set standards
for individual behavior, determined the structure of urban space, deﬁned the
autonomy of countries, and measured the quality of a people.
    The making of a modern weisheng also does not mean that earlier asso-
ciations of the term were entirely eliminated from a Chinese understand-
ing of health. If anything, one of the most noteworthy aspects of Chinese
modernity is the survival (and the popularity) of indigenous health prac-
tices such as Chinese medicine, “tai-ch’i,” and qigong. However, those ele-
ments associated with earlier meanings of weisheng—including practices
of meditation and yoga, the ingestion of speciﬁc foods, and the adherence
to lifestyle regimes based on cosmological schema—were divorced from the
realm of science in which weisheng now dwells, and were shifted on to other
words that belonged to the realm of “tradition.” By the ﬁrst decades of the
twentieth century, weisheng encompassed a wide variety of meanings that
derived their validity from their association with science, not their associ-
ation with Chinese cosmology. Weisheng today speaks in the language of
science and bureaucracy. It is no longer available to conversations about qi,
Warming or Cooling foods, or seasonal rhythms. Words that do encompass
these ‘“traditional’” concepts, particularly yangsheng, are outside of the se-
cure realm of the scientiﬁc, or dwell uneasily on its edges. Prasenjit Duara,
in his inﬂuential work Rescuing History from the Nation, has called upon
historians of China to be more aware of the way that hegemonic construc-
tions of China’s national history have suppressed alternative visions of
China’s past and China’s future.45 Such visions are never entirely sup-
pressed, but persist and threaten to overﬂow the neat conﬁnes of present
constructions of modernity. This study is dedicated to tracing the emergence
of a hegemonic vision of health as deﬁned by modernizing elites and the
state. Ultimately we must admit that the modernizing state, in its embrace
of science and rationality, may never be able to eliminate alternative con-
structions of modernity entirely. But the present study suggests that the
state, through a redeployment of intensely meaningful language, can make
some of those alternative constructions far more problematic to use than
others.
                                                   Introduction       /     19

                                ·      ·     ·

The chapters of this book interweave the writings of physicians and health
administrators with narratives of events in and around Tianjin. Chapters 1
and 2 can be read together as an exploration of premodern meanings of
weisheng. Chapter 1, “Conquering the Hundred Diseases,” examines oc-
currences of weisheng in Chinese texts published before the twentieth cen-
tury in order to sketch out an earlier matrix of meaning and practice asso-
ciated with the word. Rather than translate premodern weisheng as “health”
or “hygiene,” I have chosen to render it literally as “guarding life.” This
chapter will explain the logic behind that choice. Chapter 2, “Health and Dis-
ease in Heaven’s Ford,” reads practices of weisheng in the daily life of Tian-
jin before the city was open to foreign settlement. Using Tianjin’s herbs,
foods, and popular meditation manuals, the city’s residents strengthened
their bodies against the vagaries of the environment and the exigencies of
Tianjin’s social crises. These crises included the arrival of foreign armies in
the middle of the nineteenth century and the opening of the city as a treaty
port in 1860.
    Chapter 3, “Medical Encounters and Divergences,” explores just what
exactly constituted the “Western medicine” that ﬁrst arrived in Tianjin
aboard British warships in the 1860s and compares it with midcentury Chi-
nese approaches to health and healing. Basic debates of medical theory and
therapeutics raged in England in the mid–nineteenth century, but the na-
tion’s great sanitary revolution had already begun. Chinese and British med-
ical practitioners may have shared certain outlooks on disease and thera-
peutics, but changes in European politics had given rise to a unique
formulation of public health that was to constitute an important divergence
between the Great Qing and Great Britain.
    Chapters 4 and 5 take a detour away from Tianjin to consider the trans-
lation processes, conducted in Shanghai and Tokyo, through which weisheng
became “hygienic modernity.” Chapter 4, “Reshaping Weisheng in Treaty-
Port China,” provides a close reading of China’s ﬁrst translations that pre-
sented Western ways of hygiene under the rubric weisheng. Centered on
late nineteenth-century Euro-American debates over temperance, this
translated weisheng appeared highly selective, eccentric, and contradictory.
Nevertheless, these translations began weisheng’s signiﬁcant shift toward
the laboratory and away from correlative cosmology. Chapter 5 considers
the “birth” of hygienic modernity as Meiji physician-bureaucrats used the
term weisheng to convey a philosophy that linked the health of the indi-
vidual to the health of the nation. The regime of eisei (Chinese, weisheng)
20     /      Introduction

that these physician-bureaucrats created would become extremely impor-
tant in China after 1900.
   Chapter 6 considers the sudden changes that engulfed Tianjin during the
Boxer Uprising of 1900, when an international force comprised of the troops
of eight different imperial powers invaded and occupied the city. A careful
examination of the city’s two-year occupation reveals the centrality of health
and hygiene to the new government’s control of the city, and simultane-
ously reveals the centrality of the Japanese presence in the occupation gov-
ernment. After 1900, weisheng acquired a politically signiﬁcant deﬁnition
as “hygienic modernity”: even national sovereignty was predicated on a mas-
tery of health technologies that were judged to be adequately modern in
the eyes of foreign imperial powers. In order to regain sovereignty over Tian-
jin, the Qing government was forced to establish a department of health
(weisheng ju) analogous to the one created by the foreign occupiers. Iron-
ically, at the same time that weisheng became a cornerstone of Chinese sov-
ereignty, it began to form an essential core in a Sino-foreign discourse of
Chinese deﬁciency.
   Chapters 7 and 8 suggest how weisheng changed the physical and cul-
tural terrain of Tianjin in the ﬁrst three decades of the twentieth century.
Chapter 7, “Seen and Unseen,” examines modernity’s impulse to hide and
separate functions of life in order to create a hygienic urban environment.
Visions of an ordered and odorless Tianjin, however, were thwarted by
poverty and by the tenacious presence of the thousands of men who trans-
ported water and waste through the city’s streets. Chapter 8, “Weisheng and
the Desire for Modernity,” surveys multiple representations of weisheng
in Tianjin during the 1920s and 1930s. Although many Chinese subscribed
to the idea of weisheng as central to Chinese deﬁciency, the responses to
this lack ranged widely, from a longing for the consumer trappings of a hy-
gienically modern life to an embrace of new theories of racial hygiene, or
minzu weisheng. By the end of this period, it had become increasingly
difﬁcult, if not impossible, to formulate alternate visions of a hygienic moder-
nity that incorporated traditional forms of “guarding life.”
   The ﬁnal chapters examine the impact of midcentury imperialism on the
experience of health and disease in Tianjin. Japanese science during the war
sought both to cause epidemics and to prevent them. The result was a par-
adox of extreme hygienic efﬁciency coexisting with the use of germ war-
fare. China’s war-time legacy of germs as enemies set the stage for the Com-
munist manipulation of weisheng to incorporate meanings of enemies as
germs during the Korean War Patriotic Hygiene Campaign of 1952. As mil-
lions of Chinese were organized in this massive battle against germs,
                                                Introduction     /     21

weisheng completed its transformation from a set of individual-based tech-
niques for preserving health to a war against nature that involved the en-
tire Chinese nation. With the rise of weisheng as hygienic modernity, in-
dividual practices of health based on Chinese cosmologies still continued
to thrive in China, but for the most part they existed separately from the
scientiﬁcally sanctioned realm of weisheng. Linguistic divisions, engen-
dered by a century-long experience with imperialism, created fault lines
that held (and continue to hold) categories of tradition and modernity in
uneasy separation.
