The Data We Have vs. the Data We Need: A Comment on the State of the “Divergence” Debate (Part I) | The NEP-HIS Blog (https://nephist.wordpress.com/2017/06/06/the-data-we-have-vs-the-data-we-need-a-comment-on-the-state-of-the-divergence-debate-part-i/)
citeturn32view0 [wordlim: 200] Crawled: 4 days ago; Content type: text/html; Source: open({"ref_id":"turn31view0","lineno":35}); Total lines: 131
L19: > Abstract: This paper tackles the issue of how reliable the currently circulated ‘facts’ really are regarding the ‘Great Divergence’ debate. Our findings indicate strongly that ‘facts’ of premodern China are often of low quality and fragmented. Consequently, the application of these ‘facts’ can be misleading and harmful.
L20: 
L21: URL: cite8†http://econpapers.repec.org/paper/pramprapa/77276.htm†econpapers.repec.org L22: 
L23: Distributed by NEP-HIS on: cite9†2017-03-19†econpapers.repec.org L24: Review by: cite10†Kenneth Pomeranz†history.uchicago.edu (University of Chicago)
L25: Kent Deng and Patrick O’Brien have done us all a service by taking a step back from the conclusions drawn by different participants in the so-called “great divergence debate” to focus  on the types and quality of our data, and on some conceptual problems with the application of modern measurements such as GDP to economies that were radically different from ours – in part because they were incompletely monetized.  I find myself agreeing with most of their criticisms of both GDP and real wage comparisons, and have some of my own to add.
L26: Not surprisingly, then, I share their preference for research on comparative consumption – which was a big part of my approach in The Great Divergence – and agree that this is where we have the best prospects for making further progress on these issues.  But I am not as ready as they seem to be to completely discard approaches based on GDP or real wage estimates; and perhaps more importantly, I would significantly modify their assessment of where our discussion of consumption and popular living standards currently stands.
L27: We are, quite simply, unlikely to find any data that is good enough to lay these disputes  to rest.  I agree that the chances of finding significantly better consumption data are higher than are our chances of finding everything we would need to construct truly persuasive GDP estimates, and that the problems with treating wages as representative of living standards in a society like 18^{th} century China are quite severe,  even if we could resolve the more narrowly empirical problems with the wage data themselves (e.g.
L28: unstated but significant in-kind components, differences in the currencies in which Chinese wages and prices are often quoted, uncertainty about the length of the “day” in day wages, and so on).  But at the moment, the consumption data also have significant problems; so while this may well be where we want to concentrate future research efforts, that  does not mean that this is the only metric we should be tracking as we make our best guesses about the current state of this controversy.  (We could, of course, theoretically all agree not to comment on this controversy until we  know more, but that seems unrealistic, given how many other issues it touches upon.)   So I would be inclined to keep the wage data, and even the GDP estimates, in play in this discussion, even though I share Deng and O’Brien’s sense that the consumption data are stronger (and even though those data are more favorable to the position I took in my 2000 book).  Let me briefly review each of these areas.
L29: 
L30: 
L31: Comparative GDP Estimates
L32: I would not disagree with Deng and O’Brien’s critique of the GDP approach, or of Maddison’s figures in particular: the latter were based on far too narrow an evidentiary base for much of the world and much of history.  I think, however, it is worth noting that there have been some more recent attempts to estimate GDPs, which have the advantage both of somewhat better data and of attempting to construct GDP figures for the Yangzi Delta, rather than for China.
L33: Given the points that some of us have made repeatedly about the vastly different scales of China and any single European nation, and about the advantages of comparing the most developed region of a continent-sized China with the richest regions of Europe rather than insisting on national units, these numbers seem to be worth at least some attention.
L34: For instance, a recent paper by Stephen Broadberry, Hanhui Guan and David Daokui Li suggests that Britain must have overtaken the Yangzi Delta in per capita GDP by the first quarter of the 18^{th} century.cite11†^{[1]} This is, of course, materially different from my claim in The Great Divergence that the Yangzi Delta had not fallen significantly behind until well into the second half of the 18^{th} century, and maybe not until 1800 (though my conclusions were based on estimates of consumption, longevity, and basic human well-being, rather than GDP).  Nor has this paper found a way around all the problems with historical GDP and comparisons between very different societies to which Deng and O’Brien have pointed.(These include the radically different market baskets of these two societies, which had relatively little trade between them, the very different degree to which the government tracked various kinds of production, and others; to which I would add, large differences in the degree to which various goods and services passed through the market.)  Still, I would not want to simply discard such work, given the difficulties that dog other approaches.
L35: Moreover, I think it is noteworthy that a debate between an early and a late 18^{th} century divergence represents a considerably different intellectual landscape than the one we would have if we relied on Maddison’s GDP numbers,cite12†^{[2]} or on the non-quantitative work of David Landes, Deepak Lal, and various others – or for that matter, on an earlier attempt by Guan and Li to estimate comparative GDPs, which had previously claimed that a huge gap already existed in the 15^{th} century.cite13†^{[3]} An earlier paper by Debin Ma suggested that the per capita GDP of the Lower Yangzi  — which he defines slightly more broadly than I do, so that it includes some poorer areas – probably exceeded that of China in general by about 50% in 1750:cite14†^{[4]} such an adjustment, patched onto Maddison’s data, would leave the Delta behind Britain, but by considerably less (in percentage terms) than, say, Germany lags Norway today, or the U.S.
L36: lags Luxembourg (when nobody argues that this makes either Germany or the U.S. a “backward” economy fundamentally different from the “advanced” ones, as we used to think China was relative to early modern Europe.).
L37: Similarly, a study by Li and Van Zanden, based on data for the 1820s, finds Holland well ahead of two counties in the Delta for which there are particularly good data in those years; but as  they note, the 1820s were a period of both agricultural crisis due to natural disasters and depression in the cloth trade, the second biggest sector of that region.  They suggest that if we had data for 1800, it would show a smaller gap, but still a significant one, with Holland perhaps 50 or even 70% higher in per capita GDP.cite15†^{[5]} Admittedly, that is far from the rough parity I had originally suggested at 1800, and would now be inclined to put at somewhere around 1750 instead; there are some plausible adjustments that I think would narrow the gap further, but that is not really the point for now.  Instead I would emphasize that despite continuing disagreements and continuing data problems – the latter of which will probably never be fully solved – we have made some progress in narrowing the range of plausible answers about when and how much divergence occurred in these terms.  Even if GDP is a seriously flawed measure for purposes of this debate, I am not sure we want to throw it out entirely.
L38: Real Wage Comparisons
L39: 
L40: The wage data is similarly vexed, and Deng and O’Brien have, I think, explained very convincingly some reasons for skepticism.  But let me add two more, extend the discussion of another, and suggest a possible implication of how we might read this imperfect data in conjunction with the even more imperfect GDP data.
L41: The first additional cause for skepticism in Robert Allen’s own reconstruction of real wages based on prices and wages recorded by the supercargo of an East India Company ship docked in Guangzhou during the trading season of 1704.  Using the same basic approach as he and his co-authors use on the larger data set they compiled a bit later, Allen arrives at the conclusion that the real wages here were roughly equal to those in London at the same time – and Guangzhou, it is generally agreed, was not quite as wealthy as the Yangzi Delta.  (Allen 2004).  Let me make clear that I am not saying that these data give the correct picture,  and the other data a false one: there are certainly reasons why the Guangzhou data could be unrepresentative.cite16†^{[6]} But these are at least prices and wages that we know were actually paid by individuals in private markets, and that should be relatively free of unreported in-kind benefits.  (Chinese workers would certainly not have lived on a British ship, and are unlikely to have eaten British food.) By contrast, the Chinese data in the later and better-known 5 author paper on early modern wages around the world are from administrative reports of prevailing wages, with no evidence that the reporters actually made any sort of survey, and no data at all on in-kind compensation.  I would thus not be quick to throw out the Guangzhou material just because it is a smaller database – and that it gives a figure which is so much higher than those derived from the other data seems lke a good reason to doubt the data overall.  There is also something highly suspicious about the lack of difference between the wage rates for different parts of China in the administrative data, when every qualitative source we know of agrees that there were very large regional differences in material living standards.  Again, this is not sufficient reason to discard these data when we have so few; on the contrary, they represent the best large-scale data set that we have, and the authors have used them to make interesting claims.  But I think we need to be very careful about how we use them for this particular debate.
L42: It is crucial that most Chinese did not rely on wages for their income – as O’Brien and Deng note.  But we also know quite a bit about  the likely relationship between these wages and peasant earnings.  All our evidence suggests that tenant farmers earned a great deal more than agricultural laborers, even if the latter were able to find year-round employment.
L43: This conclusion is confirmed whether we look at estimates of money earnings, convert wages into cash and compare to farm yields net of rent and other expenses, or consider key social indicators – including the especially lowly status of wage laborers, and the fact that most tenants were able to marry and raise families, and most agricultural laborers could not.cite17†^{[7]} And in a society without strong guilds or unions, there is no reason to think that unskilled wages in town would be much higher than in the countryside.  (This would be particularly true in the Yangzi Delta, where towns were very densely distributed across the map, so that almost any rural resident could bid for an unskilled job in a town without going very far.cite18†^{[8]} )  Indeed, in the admittedly limited data we have, the difference between the earnings of a farmer with an average-sized tenancy and a wage laborer are on the order of 2.5 – 3.0:1.  Under the circumstances, wages are a very poor guide to popular living standards: and comparing them to wages in England or Holland, where proletarians made up a large portion of the labor force by the 18^{th} and especially the 19^{th} century, represents a comparison between the bottom of the income distribution in one place and something approaching to middle in the other.
L44: cite19†^{[9]} L45: But even if these wages do not tell us much about comparative living standards, they might nonetheless tell us something about trends in comparative labor productivity.
L46: Significantly, estimates of rural incomes and rural labor productivity suggest that the Yangzi Delta was still on a par with England and Holland on these measures even as late as the 1820s.cite20†^{[10]} This would place it far above the rest of Europe – including, of course, a number of countries that began mechanized industrialization and sustained per capita growth well before China did.cite21†^{[11]} Delta agriculture was also still well ahead in total factor productivity in agriculture as late as 1820.cite22†^{[12]} When taken together with the evidence already discussed which suggests a relatively late divergence, and therefore a fairly sudden widening of the gap once it manifested itself  – since nobody doubts that it was quite large by the mid-19^{th} century – this would at least suggest that we should not probably be looking at agriculture to explain the divergence.  It also suggests, as Robert Allen has argued in his discussion of British industrialization, that it was higher wages in the growing urban sector that pulled up rural wages, necessitating labor-saving innovations in agriculture, rather than agriculture creating an enlarged urban work force by shedding workers on its own.cite23†^{[13]} ^{  }It does not appear that urban demand exerted a comparably strong effect on rural Chinese wages, even though the barriers to rural-urban migration – whether in the form of exclusionary institutions or urban dis-amenities – were comparatively weak in Qing times;cite24†^{[14]} instead, the most likely reason not to leave was that, as noted above, most rural people earned far more than unskilled wage laborers in either city or countryside, and nothing was pushing up urban wages fast enough to overcome this disincentive.  A significant gap in urban real wages – if confirmed by further studies that can more fully overcome the problems described by Deng and O’Brien – might then be significant not as a sign of a difference in living standards that already existed, but as a sign of urban changes in Europe that were beginning to create such differences.
L47: (to be continued…)
L48: 
L49: Notes
L50: 
L51: cite25†[1] Broadberry, Guan and Li 2014..
L52: 
L53: cite26†[2] Maddison 2001: 42, suggesting that Western Europe overtook China ca. 1300.
L54: 
L55: cite27†[3] Guan and Li  had previously argued (2010) that China was far behind by the 15^{th} century, if not earlier, and had fallen even further behind over the succeeding centuries. See also Landes 1998, Lal 1998.
L56: 
L57: cite28†[4] Ma 2004. Compare Maddison 2003: 262.for an interpellated UK figure.
L58: 
L59: cite29†[5] Li and Van Zanden 2012:973,
L60: cite30†[6] It is true, for  instance, that not every Chinese worker in Guangzhou was able to offer his services to the  foreigners who docked there, perhaps reducing competition and driving up wages.  Bt quite a few could – numerous memoirs from foreigners who visited Guangzhou in this period speak about foreigners being besieged by crowds of potential porters and other service providers.
L61: Nor is it clear why any restrictions would have driven up the price of labor more than it did that of the many kinds of provisions for which Lockyer records prices paid, and which Allen uses to create the denominator of his real wage.
L62: cite31†[7] I review some of this data in Pomeranz 2006, and Pomeranz 2011. On the strength of tenant rights, which helped make this income differential durable, see  for instance Rawski 1972 Li Wenzhi and Jiang Taixin 2005;Yang Guozhen 1988; Zhang Peiguo 2002.
L63: 
L64: cite32†[8] On the distribution of towns across space see Xue Yong 206: 319, and 302-346, 432-475 for a discussion of various estimates of urbanization in the Yangzi Delta more generally.
L65: 
L66: cite33†[9] Pomeranz 2011.
L67: cite34†[10] Allen 2009b; Li and Van Zanden 2012.
L68: 
L69: cite35†[11] For intra-European comparisons, see Allen 2000..
L70: 
L71: cite36†[12] Li and Van Zanden 2012:975; Allen 2009b.
L72: 
L73: cite37†[13] Allen 2009a.
L74: cite38†[14] On Chinese guilds in this period, see Moll-Murata 2009, Pomeranz 2013. Though our data is thus far inconclusive, China does not appear to have had a pronounced “urban graveyard effect” – that is clear evidence of worse health and higher mortality in cities, providing a disincentive to migration that had to be overcome by significant wage differentials, as was the case in early modern and industrializing Europe.
L75: 
L76: Like
L77: ### Related
L78: 
L79: This entry was posted in cite39†China , cite40†Europe , cite41†Guest contribution and tagged cite42†China , cite43†Data , cite44†Facts , cite45†Great divergence , cite46†Western Europe on cite47†2017-06-06 by cite48†Manuel A. Bautista-González .
L80: 
L81: cite49†Image: Unknown's avatar†1.gravatar.com L82: 
L83: ## About Manuel A. Bautista-González
L84: 
L85: Economist and financial historian.
L86: 
L87: cite48†View all posts by Manuel A. Bautista-González → L88: ### Post navigation
L89: 
L90: cite50†← Contingencies of Company Law: On the Corporate Form and English Company Law, 1500-1900 cite51†The Data We Have vs. the Data We Need: A Comment on the State of the “Divergence” Debate (Part II) → L91: ## 1 thought on “The Data We Have vs. the Data We Need: A Comment on the State of the “Divergence” Debate (Part I)”
L92: 
L93:   1. Pingback: cite52†The divergence over the Great Divergence is narrowing | Andrew Batson's Blog†andrewbatson.com L94: 
L95: [Input] [Input] [Input] [Input]
L96: 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The History of Knowledge (https://www.cambridge.org/core/elements/history-of-knowledge/44D3F2F9BFF5E7005263411CB7738802)
citeturn32view1 [wordlim: 200] Crawled: 2 days ago; Content type: text/html; Source: open({"ref_id":"turn30view2","lineno":600}); Total lines: 1673
L584: When the history of knowledge began to expand in the years following the turn of the millennium, cultural history was almost regarded as the mainstream approach. Its leading representatives began to discuss how research could be developed further and renewed.
L585: In 1999, the above-mentioned Lynn Hunt and two colleagues edited a new anthology entitled Beyond the Cultural Turn.cite345†Footnote ^{20} Peter Burke – who had been central to the formation of the new cultural history – began to explore new fields, including the history of media and, later, the history of knowledge. The cultural-historical paradigm was and still is very significant.
L586: The history of knowledge is an integral part of the same research tradition and also contains visible traces of the social historical impulses that preceded the new cultural history. There is a programmatic interest in studying knowledge as a social phenomenon, and in investigating its importance in and for broader social strata.
L587: Alongside the new cultural history, we will highlight three other sources of inspiration for the history of knowledge. The first is a cluster of fields consisting of the history of science, intellectual history, science and technology studies, and the specifically Nordic disciplinary construct known as the history of ideas (idé- och lärdomshistoria).cite346†Footnote ^{21} These are dynamic fields that have long had knowledge and the production of knowledge among their primary objects of study.
L588: Since the 1970s and 1980s, they have been strongly influenced by sociological and cultural-historical perspectives. Scholars have studied extensively how scientific experiments were conducted, analysed how reputations were established, and followed laboratory personnel in real-time. In parallel, the geographical focus has also broadened to include the entire world, and the chronology has been expanded to include many other forms of knowledge than modern natural science and medicine.
L589: The history of science as a concept has been problematised, and is in certain camps considered Eurocentric and teleological.
L590: Against this background, the history of knowledge has been launched as an alternative to the history of science. Influential researchers such as Lorraine Daston have suggested that this is a more accurate term for what contemporary historians of science actually do. From this perspective, the history of knowledge is a new name for an already existing research practice. If so, it is not substantially new.
L591: This has been a common objection to the history of knowledge from our Nordic colleagues in the history of ideas. ‘What is actually new?’ has been their question.cite347†Footnote ^{22} L592: We have asserted that the history of knowledge represents an expansion and a shift in emphasis. Among other things, we have highlighted an ambition to write more comprehensive histories of society. We have also pointed out that the history of knowledge encompasses additional forms of knowledge – for example, financial, religious, and practical everyday knowledge.
L593: We have argued programmatically that a shift in perspective occurs when we move the focus from the production to the circulation of knowledge in society. During the 2020s, several studies have been published that attempt to demonstrate what this means in practice.cite348†Footnote ^{23} L594: The other group of research specialisations that have influenced the history of knowledge are the histories of media, books, and information. These fields characteristically have a deep interest in media, its functions and materiality. Media can refer to traditional mass media, such as the press, radio, and TV, but also to anything that has a mediating function: maps, terrestrial globes, matchboxes, and statistical investigations.
L595: Special interest has been paid to the invention and breakthroughs of new media. During such periods, there are often open negotiations about what the medium is and what it does. Over time, media tend to become normalised and culturally invisible. What is important at a particular time is thus not necessarily that which provokes great discussion. TV and newspapers did not disappear because the Internet and social media disrupted the playing field.cite349†Footnote ^{24} L596: The history of books focuses on a specific medium rather than an entire media system. However, the book as a medium has always been – and still is today – entirely central to the production and circulation of knowledge. The point of departure for historians of books is that books are not empty containers of text. Analysing their appearance, design, and pricing is important for understanding their wider significance. Put differently, it is not enough to read what is printed in them.
L597: Consequently, historians of books take an interest in the conditions of production, forms of distribution, edition statistics, and market conditions. When the book becomes the centre of attention, much else becomes visible. This is an approach knowledge historians have found fruitful.cite350†Footnote ^{25} L598: The third specialisation we wish to highlight as a source of inspiration is the history of education. This field has grown rapidly in recent decades, not least in connection with the education of teachers.cite351†Footnote ^{26} Today’s historians of education are interested in the school system and higher education, their configuration and governance, but also in the training that occurs in other fields, for instance through campaigns or in non-profit organisations and companies.
L599: A good deal of research within the history of education typically foregrounds learning processes and their prerequisites. The emphasis here is on the education of children and young people. In contradistinction, the other specialisations we have highlighted tend to have adults as a central focus, albeit rarely older adults.
L600: The history of knowledge finds the education of young people interesting for several reasons, one being that it presents opportunities for analysing how knowledge circulates over time and among generations.cite352†Footnote ^{27} L601: A minor specialisation that is closely connected to the history of education is the history of professions. Researchers within this field are interested in how professions are established, and how their members – lawyers, doctors, nurses, social workers, etc. – are trained and collectively maintain their positions in society. These professional groups are in close contact with specific scientific fields and institutions of higher education.
L602: Through their professional activities, they are bearers of knowledge which they put into circulation in society. Like the history of education, the history of professions also provides opportunities for the analysis of circulation over time.cite353†Footnote ^{28} L603: Taken together, the cultural history paradigm and the three major specialisations we have highlighted provide both a foundation and a set of interfaces for the history of knowledge. So far, it has primarily been with and among these fields that discussions have been held, exchanges made, and new research questions formulated. The function filled by the history of knowledge varies.
L604: In relation to cultural history, it is a narrowing and a focusing of the object of study – but in relation to other fields it is rather a way to pose broader questions: What is its significance beyond the academy? How does it relate to the major social changes of the time? What happens if we combine x with the contemporary phenomena of y and z?
L605: From a broader scholarly perspective, it is not wrong to claim that the history of knowledge has so far mainly fulfilled an intradisciplinary rather than an interdisciplinary function.
L606: In other words, historians of knowledge have above all bridged gaps between various sub-disciplines of historical scholarship and, to a lesser degree, established new collaborations with other scholars in the humanities and social sciences who deal with ‘knowledge studies’ in, for instance, anthropology, philosophy, sociology, psychology, law, political science, and comparative literature.
L607: We feel that in future it would be desirable to have more genuinely interdisciplinary exchanges, and that there is a great unexploited potential here.
L608: #### 1.3 The Main Specialisations of the History of Knowledge
L609: 
L610: The recent strong development of the history of knowledge nevertheless risks overshadowing the fact that there are several competing ideas about what the field is or should be. After all, the history of knowledge appears today in a number of different guises. When we examine the current landscape of the field, we can distinguish at least five main, sometimes overlapping, specialisations.cite354†Footnote ^{29} L611: First, there is an encyclopaedic variant of the history of knowledge. It is characterised by an all-encompassing ambition rather than by new perspectives or theoretical reasoning. The best examples of this are Peter Burke’s general books on the history of knowledge.
L612: In A Social History of Knowledge (two volumes, cite355†Reference Burke2000 and cite356†Reference Burke2012 ) he demonstrates being widely read in the history of ideas, culture, and science of the last five hundred years, from Gutenberg to Wikipedia.cite357†Footnote ^{30} L613: In the first chapter of his introductory book What Is the History of Knowledge? (cite358†Reference Burke2016 ), Burke presents basic concepts, processes, and problems of the history of knowledge. Building on the two earlier volumes, he also formulates some general reflections on the subject. His starting point is that knowledge exists in various forms in any given culture: pure and applied, explicit and implicit, learned and popular, male and female, local and universal.
L614: Against this background, Burke argues that there ‘are only histories, in the plural, of knowledges, also in the plural’.cite359†Footnote ^{31} L615: Historians of science suggest a different understanding of the history of knowledge. As previously mentioned, to them it offers a reformulation of the traditional objects of study in their field, thereby challenging established concepts and patterns of interpretation. For example, in several articles Lorraine Daston has described the transformation of the history of science in recent decades.
L616: As a result of global and practical developments in the discipline, its methodological repertoire has broadened considerably, and its objects of study have become more diverse. Consequently, many historians of science have distanced themselves from an older, teleological foundational narrative about the evolution of Western science to the degree that a more adequate designation for today’s specialisation would, according to Daston, be the history of knowledge.
L617: One advantage of this designation is that it is not linked to a particular modern understanding of science, but is capable of encompassing the study of Hellenistic alchemy, pre-Columbian botany in South America, and social science of the post-war era. At the same time, Daston points out, the nebulous character of the history of knowledge is problematic: what does not fit into the field?cite360†Footnote ^{32} L618: The field’s vagueness has not prevented historians of science from associating themselves with it in recent studies.
L619: For instance, Elaine Leong has adopted the history of knowledge as a framework for analysing medicine and science in early modern English households, while Jürgen Renn has used it as a general point of departure in his book The Evolution of Knowledge (cite361†Reference Renn2020 ).cite362†Footnote ^{33} Another group of historians of science have been inspired by the history of knowledge in applying new perspectives to the history of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.cite363†Footnote ^{34} L620: In a third interpretation, the history of knowledge becomes a field that encompasses the study of all academic forms of knowledge, not only those that have traditionally been a central focus for historians of science, technology, or medicine. The best example here is the renewed interest in the history of the humanities. A key figure is Rens Bod, who has spearheaded writing a more integrative history that extends beyond the study of single humanistic disciplines.
L621: In the first issue of the journal History of Humanities (cite364†Reference Bod2016 ), he and his colleagues encouraged researchers in the history of the humanities to take an active interest in the history of the natural sciences, and vice versa. ‘Eventually’, they wrote, ‘a case could be made for uniting the history of the humanities and the history of science under the head of “history of knowledge”’.cite365†Footnote ^{35} L622: There are certain recurring themes and approaches in this recent research on the history of the humanities.
L623: One type of investigation focuses on studying the formation of the humanities as a distinct field, along with how its relations to other areas of knowledge, particularly the natural sciences, have shifted over time.cite366†Footnote ^{36} Another approach applies perspectives from the modern history of science to analyse humanists of the past; one example is using the concept of the persona to investigate ideals and norms prevalent among historians of a particular era.cite367†Footnote ^{37} Yet another type of analysis concentrates on the materiality and infrastructure of the humanities, for example archives, libraries, and museums.cite368†Footnote ^{38} And finally, researchers, not least Rens Bod himself, assume global perspectives and compare Western to other forms of knowledge.cite369†Footnote ^{39} L624: In a fourth version of the history of knowledge, rational, systematic, or academic knowledge is simply one among several forms of knowledge. Proponents of this specialisation feel that attention should also be paid to tacit and practical knowledge, as well as to indigenous knowledge. Anna Nilsson Hammar has taken, for example, Aristotle’s division of knowledge as her point of departure.
L625: She emphasises that researchers have hitherto focused on the production and circulation of scientific or rational knowledge (theoria), but have devoted less attention to other forms of knowledge (praxis and poiesis) or to the relationships among these.cite370†Footnote ^{40} L626: A greater multiplicity of forms of knowledge has also been suggested in two journals impacted by the history of knowledge.
L627: In the introduction to the first number of KNOW, Shadi Bartsch-Zimmer and her co-editors explain that the aim of the journal is ‘uncovering and explicating diverse forms of knowledge from antiquity to the present, and accounting for contemporary forms of knowledge in terms of their history, politics, and culture’.cite371†Footnote ^{41} In a similar manner, the editors of the Journal for the History of Knowledge stated in its initial issue that the journal will be devoted to ‘the history of knowledge in its broadest sense’, including ‘the study of science, but also of indigenous, artisanal and other types of knowledge’.
L628: This journal is also meant to offer a platform for contributions that compare Western and non-Western forms of knowledge, or that analyse relationships among concepts and practices from various parts of the world.cite372†Footnote ^{42} L629: Finally, in a fifth understanding of the history of knowledge the emphasis is on knowledge as a basic category in society. One common denominator among those who underline the role and relevance of knowledge in society is that they have academic backgrounds in the subject of history, with its traditional focus on politics, social relations, and cultural phenomena.
L630: In an early programmatic article from the German-language history of knowledge, ‘Was ist Wissensgeschichte?’ (cite373†Reference Sarasin2011 ), Philipp Sarasin emphasises that historians have always wanted to relate to broader contexts and have searched for totalities, be they the nation or society.
L631: Consequently, he argues that the history of knowledge should deal with ‘the social production and circulation of knowledge’, because knowledge moves among different people, groups, and contexts, and can in principle cross institutional, social, political, and geographical boundaries.
L632: This is not the same thing as the free dissemination and the even distribution of knowledge, but it means that knowledge by its very nature can be transmitted, put into circulation, and interact in other fields of knowledge in various social contexts.cite374†Footnote ^{43} L633: In another programmatic article, Simone Lässig discusses what the history of knowledge has to offer historical research in general. She considers the field a version of social and cultural history that investigates knowledge as a phenomenon that impacts nearly every aspect of human life.
L634: Her view of knowledge and society is clear in her concluding sentences: ‘The history of knowledge does not emphasize knowledge instead of society but rather seeks to analyse and comprehend knowledge in society and knowledge in culture. Approaching society and culture in all their complexity, the history of knowledge will broaden and deepen our understanding of how humans have created knowledge over the course of the past.’cite375†Footnote ^{44} L635: The five understandings of the history of knowledge described here are quite general: there are no discrete lines of demarcation among them, and none represents a well-defined research programme.
L636: If anything, they illustrate the fact that the history of knowledge is capable of attracting followers from many different academic disciplines, and that the specific knowledge-historical form adopted is determined by the intellectual and scholarly tradition the researcher in question belongs to and wants to promote.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Before the Great Divergence? Comparing the Yangzi Delta and the Netherlands at the Beginning of the Nineteenth Century | The Journal of Economic History | Cambridge Core (https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-economic-history/article/before-the-great-divergence-comparing-the-yangzi-delta-and-the-netherlands-at-the-beginning-of-the-nineteenth-century/484ACE5A80517C7D9B63CF80B41D6978)
citeturn32view2 [wordlim: 200] Crawled: today; Content type: text/html; Source: open({"ref_id":"https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-economic-history/article/before-the-great-divergence-comparing-the-yangzi-delta-and-the-netherlands-at-the-beginning-of-the-nineteenth-century/484ACE5A80517C7D9B63CF80B41D6978","lineno":null}); Redirected to URL: https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-economic-history/article/abs/before-the-great-divergence-comparing-the-yangzi-delta-and-the-netherlands-at-the-beginning-of-the-nineteenth-century/484ACE5A80517C7D9B63CF80B41D6978; Total lines: 784

