Edinburgh Research Explorer

Border studies
Temporality, space and scale


Citation for published version:
Nugent, P 2018, Border studies: Temporality, space and scale. in M Middell (ed.), The Routledge Handbook
of Transregional Studies. 1 edn, Routledge History Handbooks, Routledge.




Link:
Link to publication record in Edinburgh Research Explorer


Document Version:
Peer reviewed version



Published In:
The Routledge Handbook of Transregional Studies


Publisher Rights Statement:
This is an Accepted Manuscript of a book chapter published by Routledge in The Routledge Handbook of
Transregional Studies on 8/11/2018, available online: https://www.routledge.com/The-Routledge-Handbook-of-
Transregional-Studies/Middell/p/book/9781138718364




General rights
Copyright for the publications made accessible via the Edinburgh Research Explorer is retained by the author(s)
and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and
abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.


Take down policy
The University of Edinburgh has made every reasonable effort to ensure that Edinburgh Research Explorer
content complies with UK legislation. If you believe that the public display of this file breaches copyright please
contact openaccess@ed.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately and
investigate your claim.




Download date: 19. Sep. 2026
Paul Nugent

Border studies


                                           19

                      BORDER STUDIES
                 Temporality, space, and scale
                                     Paul Nugent
The prediction that processes of globalization would inexorably lead to the
diminished significance of international borders now seems decidedly misplaced. In
fact, the most profound issues of our times are framed by the stubborn persistence of
international borders in some places and their reconfiguration in others. Some of the
issues relate to the positioning of the borders, while others concern the movement of
people (e.g. migrants and refugees) and commodities (e.g. narcotics and pirated
goods) through them. The process of global rebordering has been so rapid in the past
five years that, inevitably, academic analysis is struggling to catch up.

   Whereas there is often a problem in defining the limits of an academic field, there
is actually substantial consensus when it comes to border(land) studies. But if the field
itself is clearly bounded, it would be difficult to identify a unified approach, far less a
grand theory. In fact, most boundary scholars have eschewed any such agenda (Paasi
2005: 668). Border studies straddles the core disciplines, and mediates between them,
but it does not seek to replace them. Hence, it makes little sense to reinvent
development economics or mobility studies in order to make sense of border flows.
But because there are always at least two – and sometimes three – sides to any set of
borders, they can serve as a kind of social laboratory for understanding the production
of difference – whether with respect to governance structures, the economy, or
cultural norms. Some of the research that is carried out in border locations is not
explicitly positioned as border(land) studies. For those who regard themselves as
contributing to such a defined field, much of the appeal lies in the opportunity to
escape the tyranny of the disciplines and the confines of area studies. It also lies in
finding common ground with researchers who have quite different regional
specialisms.

   Because international boundaries tend to throw up cognate phenomena, they lend
themselves to larger comparisons. For example, comparing migratory flows or small-
scale trade across the United States (US)–Mexico and South Africa–Lesotho borders
can be extremely enlightening (Coplan 2009), even if logistical difficulties mean that
there are relatively few comparisons of this kind. But a sensitivity to the benefits of
comparison is hardwired into border studies scholarship.

   In order to provide a rounded account of the varied approaches to the study of
borders across the world, it is important to take into account the different dimensions
in which research is conducted as well as the themes that are more or less evenly
distributed across them. Here, I will offer a broad overview, while drawing on some
specific examples. Many of these are African, partly for the reason that this happens
to be my own area of specialism, but also because this has been one of the undoubted
growth areas in recent years. However, I will also have recourse to the findings of
scholars working on Europe, Asia, and the Americas.

                   Viewing borders three-dimensionally
Border scholars grapple with very different bodies of material, which is in part a
function of disparate disciplinary starting points. An area that used to be the preserve
of geographers, historians, and international lawyers is now shared with political
scientists, anthropologists, sociolinguists, and students of cultural studies. In addition,
a field that used to be dominated by studies of the US–Mexico border and Europe has
become much more variegated as insights distilled from other regions of the world
have gained traction. For some, the research in question might consist of burrowing
through administrative and legal archives in national or regional capitals, or engaging
with policy-makers in centres of decision-making such as Brussels and Washington;
for others, it is made up of a fine-grained analysis of dynamics in notionally remote
fieldwork sites.

   When sources converge and corroborate each other, the researcher is lucky indeed.
However, it is more commonly the case that materials reach the researcher in very
different registers, highlight different phenomena, and are sometimes flatly
contradictory. The dimension(s) that the researcher chooses to emphasize inevitably
involve choices, and these in turn have a bearing on the shape of the data that are
collected.

   However, one advantage that border scholars can exploit is that they are able to
mine perspectives from either side of the line. Archives tend to offer a dual
perspective on the same set of issues, but this is no less true of oral informants who
interpret reality in the light of circumstances on their own side of a given boundary
line. For the purposes of this discussion, I will focus on three dimensions and the
disciplines to which they are generally related.
                                     Temporality
As political geographers have repeatedly reminded us, the notion that there are natural
boundaries that manifest themselves in the contours of state borders is deeply
problematic. Borders are the work of human decisions rather than Mother Nature, and
to that extent are the product both of grand design and messy compromise. For
historians, the meaningful questions are why borders have emerged in particular
places, according to which logics, and with what consequences.

   In Europe, boundary-making and state formation have generally been treated as
closely related historical processes, in which contested frontier zones have sedimented
as international boundaries – as in the case, for example, of France and Spain in the
Pyrenees (Sahlins 1989). Europe also provides striking examples of the manner in
which warfare – and even more often peace-making – has led to the abrupt
repositioning of established borders, as happened in Europe and Africa after both
world wars. These realities should lead one to be sceptical of the notion that borders
emerged organically in the Old World context, whereas in the colonies they were
externally driven.

   Although some colonial borders were the consequence of international agreements
made in distant European capitals, they also tended to slip into the grooves created by
pre-colonial frontier zones (Nugent 2019 [forthcoming]). Although Africa has
commonly been regarded as the continent afflicted by the most ‘artificial boundaries’,
there is now an accumulating body of research that indicates that there was no
colonial ‘big bang’ moment and that pre-existing spatial logics exercised a decisive
influence (Nugent 2019 [forthcoming]; McGregor 2009).
   The question of temporality is no less important for understanding the
reconfiguration of borders after 1945. The implosion of European empires, and the
closely associated outbreak of the Cold War, led to the emergence of new and often
rather hard borders in Asia: most notably between North and South Korea and
between India and Pakistan. In Europe itself, the disastrous record of conflict in the
twentieth century was part of what motivated the push toward continental integration,
in which the erasure of divisive borders and the ending of zero-sum politics was an
explicit objective. With the end of the Cold War and the disintegration of the Soviet
Union, the borders of Eastern and Central Europe were reconfigured in a manner that
turned back the clock. Equally, the implosion of post-1919 borders in the Middle East
is a further indication that, nearly a century later, history refuses to lie down.
                                          Space
The study of international borders is very obviously about the making and remaking
of space. The often imperfect relationship between cartographic representation and
the realities on the ground has been of particular interest to historical geographers.
Whether contemporary satellite imagery is any more conducive to establishing
objective truths is a moot point because they are partial representations in their own
right.

   The demarcation of an international border necessarily creates its own dynamic
because it creates sites where one regime of governance notionally ends and another
begins. Whereas border/boundary studies concerns that which takes place at the line
of separation, borderland studies is concerned with what unfolds in zones of
engagement located on either side of a given line. These can evidently extend well
beyond the physical border.

   On the basis that borders are a state effect, there has been a growing tendency,
especially among anthropologists, to focus upon ‘bordering’ processes located further
still from the borderline. This would include international airports, seaports, and
remote locations identified as migrant/refugee processing centres. Islands present their
own unique challenges in that the entire coastline typically represents a physical
border – albeit one that does not need to be physically demarcated.
                                          Scale
