Source: https://www.columbia.edu/~aw2951/B52.pdf
Selected pdftotext -layout extract only. Published pp. 301–303, 324–325.

        Methodological nationalism and beyond:
         nation-state building, migration and the
                                social sciences


            ANDREAS WIMMER AND NINA GLICK SCHILLER

Abstract Methodological nationalism is understood as the assumption that the
nation/state/society is the natural social and political form of the modern world. We
distinguish three modes of methodological nationalism that have characterized main-
stream social science, and then show how these have influenced research on migra-
tion. We discover parallels between nationalist thinking and the conceptualization of
migration in postwar social sciences. In a historical tour d’horizon, we show that this
mainstream concept has developed in close interaction with nation-state building pro-
cesses in the West and the role that immigration and integration policies have played
within them. The shift towards a study of ‘transnational communities’ – the last phase
in this process – was more a consequence of an epistemic move away from methodo-
logical nationalism than of the appearance of new objects of observation. The article
concludes by recommending new concepts for analysis that, on the one hand, are not
coloured by methodological nationalism and, on the other hand, go beyond the
fluidism of much contemporary social theory.


After the first flurry of confusion about the nature and extent of contemporary pro-
cesses of globalization, social scientists moved beyond rhetorical generalities about
the decline of the nation-state and began to examine the ways in which nation-states
are currently being reconfigured rather than demolished. That nation-states and
nationalism are compatible with globalization was made all too obvious. We wit-
nessed the flouring of nationalism and the restructuring of a whole range of new states
in Eastern Europe along national lines in the midst of growing global interconnec-
tions. The concomitance of these processes provides us with an intellectual opening to
think about the limitations of our conceptual apparatus. It has become easier to under-
stand that it is because we have come to take for granted a world divided into discrete
and autonomous nation-states that we see nation-state building and global inter-
connections as contradictory. The next step is to analyse how the concept of the
nation-state has and still does influence past and current thinking in the social
sciences, including our thinking about transnational migration.
    It is our aim in this article to move in this direction by exploring the intellectual
potential of two hypotheses. We demonstrate that nation-state building processes have
fundamentally shaped the ways immigration has been perceived and received. These
perceptions have in turn influenced, though not completely determined, social science


Global Networks 2, 4 (2002) 301–334. ISSN 1470–2266
© 2002 Andreas Wimmer and Nina Glick Schiller                                        301
Andreas Wimmer and Nina Glick Schiller

theory and methodology and, more specifically, its discourse on immigration and inte-
gration. We are designating as methodological nationalism the assumption that the
                                                                                   1
nation/state/society is the natural social and political form of the modern world.
    The article is organized into four sections. The first discusses four modes of
methodological nationalism and shows their importance in social science thinking.
We then demonstrate how the study of transnational migration was influenced and
limited by the constraints of methodological nationalism. Third, we sketch out a his-
torical perspective that allows us to see how nation building, the control and res-
triction of immigration and the rise of a social science preoccupation with migration
are interlinked processes developing in a transnational field of social forces. The
fourth section focuses on the last phase in this process and describes the recent waves
of research on globalization and transnational migration.
    Only now that nation-states have lost some of their power to transnational cor-
porations and supranational organizations can we see, looking backward, what shape
modernity has taken during the last 200 years. It was cast in the iron cage of national-
ized states that confined and limited our own analytical capacities. Reflecting the
current conceptual liberation, the influence of methodological nationalism has begun
to be examined in history (Bender 2001; Rodgers 1998), geography (Taylor 1996),
sociology (Beck 2000) and anthropology (Glick Schiller 2000; Glick Schiller et al.
1992, 1995; Wimmer 1996a). Perhaps it was more difficult to see the world in three
dimensions when the sun stood at its zenith. In the evening, shadows grow and allow
us to perceive the environment in clearer contours.
    What we discover in this twilight is how transnational the modern world has
always been, even in the high days when the nation-state bounded and bundled most
social processes. Rather than a recent offspring of globalization, transnationalism
appears as a constant of modern life, hidden from a view that was captured by metho-
dological nationalism. Thus, the value of studying transnational communities and
migration is not to discover ‘something new’ – though this represents a highly
rewarding strategy of research in our contemporary intellectual environment – but to
have contributed to this shift of perspective away from methodological nationalism. A
thorough reflection on the history of transnational social relations and their recent
‘discovery’ may thus be an appropriate starting point for rethinking the history of the
social sciences in general. It may help us develop the perspective of an ‘observer of
second order’, as Niklas Luhmann once said, from which we can observe both the
social scientists observing the social world as well as the effects that this has on this
world and how, at the same time, the forces of the social world shape the outlook of
the social scientists.

Three modes of methodological nationalism
Our argument focuses on what we perceive as the major, dominant trends in social
science thinking of the past century. We do not discuss coterminous currents that con-
tradicted the hegemonic discourse. Especially in times of intensified global inter-
connections, theories reflecting these developments appeared and provided tools for
analysis not coloured by methodological nationalism. The most obvious of these
currents was political economy in the Marxian tradition, always devoting attention to
capitalism as a global system rather than to its specific national manifestations, and




302
                                               Methodological nationalism and beyond

especially the studies of imperialism by Rosa Luxemburg and others before the First
World War, when transnational movements of commodities, capital and labour
reached a first peak. Wallerstein’s world system theory belongs to a second wave of
theorizing developing in the 1970s, when transnational connections were again inten-
sifying and multiplying. A second and equally important line of development not
included in our discussion is methodological individualism in its various forms where
the analysis does not rely on explicit reference to larger social entities (such as the
school of marginal utility and rational choice in economics and political science or
interactionism in sociology).
    These views remained heterodox, however, and did not shape the social science
programme in the same way as the currents discussed in this article did. The epistemic
structures and programmes of mainstream social sciences have been closely attached
to, and shaped by, the experience of modern nation-state formation. The global forces
of transnational capitalism and imperialism, that reached their apogee precisely in the
period when social sciences formed as independent disciplines, left only few traces in
the basic paradigmatic assumptions of these disciplines and were scarcely reflected
upon systematically.
    Our starting point is the classical social theory that has marked the sociological
tradition especially. As a host of scholars have repeatedly argued, the classic theory of
modernity has a blind spot when it comes to understanding the rise of nation-states as
well as of nationalism and ethnicity (Esser 1988; Guiberneau 1997; Imhof 1997;
A. D. Smith 1983; Thompson and Fevre 2001). In the eyes of Marx, Durkheim,
Weber and Parsons, the growing differentiation, rationalization and modernization of
society gradually reduced the importance of ethnic and national sentiments. Most
classic grand theory was constructed as a series of socio-structural types (from
feudalism through capitalism to communism, from Gemeinschaft to Gesellschaft,
organic to mechanic solidarity, traditional to modern society, and so forth).
Nationalism was attributed to earlier stages in the continuum of social evolution. As a
traditional, communitarian, ascriptive, bourgeois or pre-rational phenomenon,
nationalism was thought to be a transitory stage on the way to the modern,
rationalized and individualized class society based on achievement. Nationalism and
patriotism were soon to be wiped out by proletarian internationalism (Marx and
Engels) or by a post-patriotic ‘idéal humaine’ (Durkheim) (see A. D. Smith 1983;
Guiberneau 1997; on Max Weber’s rather more differentiated later view A. D. Smith
1983: 31–3).
    These schemes were shielded from the overwhelming and obvious fact that
nationalist politics and conflicts have shaped the history of the nineteenth and twen-
tieth centuries. Grand theory was immunized thanks to a hierarchical division of
labour between academic disciplines. The study of the rise of nationalism and the
nation-state, of ethno-national wars of nineteenth- and early twentieth-century Europe
was delegated to history – with few exceptions such as a short essay Durkheim wrote
immediately after the First Word War. Communal identities and nation-building pro-
cesses outside Europe and the United States were made the domains of anthropology
and later of political science. The much-deplored failure of social theory until the
1980s to address the significance and sources of nationalism in the modern world can
in part be attributed to this disciplinary division of labour that was established at the
beginning of twentieth century (Wimmer 1999).



                                                                                    303
Andreas Wimmer and Nina Glick Schiller

ism that could not be addressed during previous periods are now possible to research
and theorize. However, this does not mean that we have broken free from the influ-
ence of methodological nationalism. We are still struggling to understand how our
vision is being shaped and distorted by our own location in the grid of nation-states
and the constraints this places on our scientific perspectives. We conclude this section
with some areas in which methodological nationalism is still visible.
    Diaspora studies often trace dispersed populations no matter where they have
settled, focusing on the dynamics of interconnection, nostalgia and memory and iden-
tity within a particular population, relating them to a particular homeland. No longer
confined to a territorially limited entity, the nation is extending across different
terrains and places but nevertheless imagined as an organic, integrated whole. In this
modus operandi, nation-state building processes that impinge upon diasporic
populations in various locations are usually overlooked. If the relationship between
the diaspora and nation-state building is examined, it is uniquely and exclusively in
terms of the diaspora’s own homeland and its politics. Thus, the image and analytical
techniques associated with describing a bounded national container society are repro-
duced, albeit in a different form.
    Similar points have to be made with regard to the study of ‘transnational
communities’. Here many of the critiques of the past errors of community studies
apply: much of transnational studies overstates the internal homogeneity and boun-
dedness of transnational communities, overestimates the binding power for individual
action, overlooks the importance of cross-community interactions as well as the
internal divisions of class, gender, region and politics, and is conceptually blind to
those cases where no transnational communities form among migrants or where exist-
ing ones cease to be meaningful for individuals. Furthermore, the different meanings
of a particular transnational identity are usually precluded, meanings that take actors
in very different political directions and alliances. In short, approaching migrant
transnational social fields and networks as communities tends to reify and essentialize
these communities in a similar way that previous approaches reified national commu-
nities or the Redfield school essentialized peasant communities.
    Strangely enough, the neo-communitarianism of transnationalism studies also
reproduces the standard image of a world divided into nations and thus naturalizes
this vision of the world in new forms. Transnational semantically refers us to the non-
transnational or simply to the national as the entity that is crossed or superseded.
Migrants are no longer uprooted or climbing up the assimilative ladder to the national
middle classes, but they are still the others, foreign and alien to the nationally-
bounded society. Studies that examine the connections between transnational
migrants and actors within the various localities in which they settle and into which
they move could carry us beyond the static, reified and essentialized concept of
community and into the study of migrants and non-migrants within social fields of
differential power (see Nyiri 1999; Ong 1999; Wimmer 1998b).

Some final remarks
Going beyond methodological nationalism in the study of current migration thus may
require more than a focus on transnational communities instead of the nation and its
immigrants. In order to escape the magnetism of established methodologies, ways of




324
                                               Methodological nationalism and beyond

defining the object of analysis and algorithms for generating questions, we may have
to develop (or rediscover?) analytical tools and concepts not coloured by the self-
evidence of a world ordered into nation-states. This is what we perceive, together with
many other current observers of the social sciences, as the major task lying ahead of
us. We are certainly not able to offer such a set of analytical tools here (Castles 2001;
Wimmer 2002).
    Rather, it was one aim of this article to describe with more precision than has
hitherto been the case the obstacles to overcome on this road to a new social theory.
Knowing more about how our perceptions of migration, including some of the recent
work on transnationalism, have been shaped by the nation-state building project of the
modern world is an important step. It may prevent us from running, enthusiastically
searching for newness, along the most promising-looking road, without knowing
exactly how we got to the crossroad where we actually find ourselves. Looking back
may help us to identify the paths that will bring us right back to where we now stand.
We described three modes of methodological nationalism that have shaped the social
science programme: ignoring, naturalization and territorial limitation, and we have
identified the ways in which these have influenced mainstream migration studies.
Describing immigrants as political security risks, as culturally others, as socially mar-
ginal and as an exception to the rule of territorial confinement, migration studies have
faithfully mirrored the nationalist image of normal life.
    Our second aim was to sketch out, in admittedly rather audacious and broad
strokes, a history of the past century that would help us to understand how this
binding of the scientific eye to the body of the nation came about and how this
relationship has evolved through different phases of nation building. We started this
historical tour d’horizon from the period of unrestricted migration in an environment
of a globalized economy and fierce competition between nationalizing states and
ended it again in a period of intensified globalization, our contemporary epoch.
During the period in between, the fabrics of economic, political and cultural life were
more and more closed along national lines and the container model of society
established its hegemony over the social sciences. For all these different phases, we
have described how the process of nation-state building has generated, as one of its
aspects, different stances towards cross-border migration and immigrant integration
that were mirrored, if not sometimes sustained or even produced, by the basic con-
cepts of migration research. Taking such a historically informed ‘view from afar’
allowed us to see what migration researchers saw, what they did not see and to
explain why these varying blind spots have evolved. We have taken the point of view
of an observer of second order, observing what professional observers do and do not
observe.
    Thus, we tried to give an example of how the methodological limitations of first
order observations could be overcome. This example took the form of an anthropo-
logically informed historical narrative. Such an approach does not provide the well-
developed conceptual tools that would allow us to elaborate this perspective more
systematically. This remains a task for the future. However, a word of caution is in
place here. It would certainly be naive to think that we will ever develop a theoretical
language not profoundly influenced by the social and political forces around us –
most of us have given up the dream of reaching an Archimedean point of objectivity.
Equally naive would be to maintain that methodological nationalism was inhibiting a



                                                                                    325
