Revised Manuscript | AHR OPEN REVIEW (https://ahropenreview.com/HistoryCanBeOpenSource/revised-manuscript/)
citeturn102view0 [wordlim: 200] Crawled: 2 weeks ago; Content type: text/html; Source: click({"ref_id":"turn90view0","id":19}); Total lines: 1009
L0: cite0†Skip to Content | cite1†Skip to Table of Contents L1: 
L2: # cite2†AHR OPEN REVIEW L3: 
L4: History Can Be Open Source: Democratic Dreams and the Rise of Digital History
L5: 
L6:   * cite3†Navigate L7:   * cite0†Content L8:   * cite4†Discuss L9: 
L10: ## Contents
L11: 
L12: ### Search
L13: 
L14: Search for: [Input] [Input]
L15: 
L16: ### Special Pages
L17: 
L18:   * cite5†Title Page L19:   * cite6†General Comments L20:   * cite7†All Comments L21:   * cite8†Comments by Commenter L22:   * cite9†Blog L23:   * cite10†Blog Archive L24:   * cite11†Log in L25: ### Table of Contents
L26: 
L27:   * cite5†Introduction L28:   * cite12†Letter From the Editor L29:   * cite13†Initial Manuscript L30:   * cite14†Reader’s Report #1 L31:   * cite15†Reader’s Report #2 L32:   * cite16†Reader’s Report #3 L33:   * cite17†Editor’s Comments L34:   * cite18†Authors’ Response L35:   * cite19†Revised Manuscript L36:   * cite20†Reader’s Report #1 (Second Report) L37:   * cite21†Reader’s Report #2 (Second Report) L38:   * cite22†Editor’s Decision L39:   * cite23†Second Authors’ Response L40:   * cite24†Second Revised Manuscript L41: 
L42:   * cite18†Previous page L43:   * cite20†Next page L44: ## cite19†Revised Manuscript L45: 
L46: cite25†Image†secure.gravatar.com cite26†ahropenreview_otl135 L47: 
L48: cite19†August 3, 2020 L49: # History Can Be Open Source: Democratic Dreams and the Rise of Digital History
L50: In 2006, pioneering digital historian Roy Rosenzweig published an article in the Journal of American History entitled “Can History Be Open Source? Wikipedia and the Future of the Past.” By then Wikipedia had already become, he said, “perhaps the largest work of online historical writing, the most widely read work of digital history, and the most important free historical resource on the World Wide Web.”cite27†^{[1]} Rosenzweig declared that historians “have a responsibility to make better information sources available online” and called the profession to “emulate the great democratic triumph of Wikipedia—its demonstration that people are eager for free and accessible information resources.”cite28†^{[2]} L51: Thirteen years after Rosenzweig’s plea, technological innovation, institutional resources, professional norms, and shifting scholarly attitudes have converged to prove Rosenzweig right: history can be open source. And yet, while scores of digital projects have provided free, high-quality, peer-reviewed digital historical material, the historical profession has rarely stopped to take critical stock of not only of open education resources (OER), but the rise of digital history itself.
L52: The field of digital history is most often still discussed in the future tense, in terms of the scholarly promises of emerging technologies and practices, rather than through reflection upon the rewards reaped by what is now several decades of academic labor.cite29†^{[3]} It is the goal of this piece to historicize digital history and the wider digital humanities by confronting their past and present claims to “democracy.” Placing digital history’s rise in a historical and institutional context, surveying the past and present landscape of digital projects, and evaluating their inconsistent, often problematic, and yet foundational democratic aspirations, this article moves beyond questions of technological innovation and digital access to engage more fundamental and intractable questions about inequality, community, and participatory historical inquiry.cite30†[4] L53: The dream of “democratization” fueled much of the rise of digital history and the larger digital humanities.cite31†[5] Early discussions of digital history, nearly all written by white men, lauded the democratic potential of new technology.cite32†[6] “In the 1990s, the animating spirit behind much of our work in the digital humanities was democratization,” said William G. Thomas III, a digital historian and co-founder of digital humanities centers at the University of Virginia and the University of Nebraska.
L54: “Our ambitions then were only secondarily to experiment with new forms of scholarship.
L55: They were primarily to democratize history: to transform the way history was understood by changing the way it was produced and accessed.”cite33†[7] Founded in 1994, the Center for History and New Media (CHNM) at George Mason University—later renamed for Rosenzweig—declared that it “used digital media and computer technology to democratize history—to incorporate multiple voices, reach diverse audiences, and encourage popular participation in presenting and preserving the past.”cite34†[8] Such claims borrowed from the wider digital humanities.
L56: As Bridget Draxler and the Humanities, Arts, Science, and Technology Alliance (HASTAC) explained, it was the fundamental mission of the digital humanities “to democratize knowledge to reach out to ‘publics,’ share academic discoveries, and invite an array of audiences to participate in knowledge production.”cite35†^{[9]} Optimistic calls for democratic digital work echoed throughout universities, museums, archives, and beyond.
L57: As early digital humanists touted the democratic potential of digital technology, Silicon Valley’s prophets preached the “theory of disruptive innovation” to eager university administrators with the promise of inevitable democratic revolutions. But disruption is not a synonym for democracy.
L58: As Rosenzweig put it, “neither the democratization or the commodification of higher education is inherent in technology.”cite36†[10] In fact, digital humanists such as Safiya Umoja Noble, Kim Gallon, Jessica Marie Johnson, and others, building upon the work of intersectional feminists, demonstrate how persistent systematic injustices prevent participatory equality and  expose patterns of marginalization lurking in supposedly value-neutral digital worlds.cite37†[11] What, then, does “democracy” mean in a world caught between evolving technology and intransigent structural barriers? And how have digital humanists confronted the insatiable conquest of market logics in American life—a rapacious neoliberalism that political theorist Wendy Brown argues has “inaugurate[d] democracy’s conceptual unmooring and substantive disembowelment.”cite38†[12] L59: Grappling with the practice of digital history and analyzing its maturation, particularly in light of its contemporary critics, demands a critical engagement with the long quest for “democracy.” “Democracy,” of course, is a slippery term: vague, often unreflective ideas of “democracy” drove much of the development of the field of digital history.
L60: It is not the goal of this essay to arrive at a positive, substantive definition of “democracy”—centuries of writers, theorists, and activists have already tried and failed to mobilize popular consensus around the term.cite39†[13] Nevertheless, we identify and evaluate the three major strains of “democratization” deployed by digital historians over the past several decades: the first emphasized expanded access by championing digitization and open online distribution of historical material to new users; the second hoped for democratization at the level of production, inviting greater participation and collaboration in the conception and construction of digital projects; and the third, inspired especially by the scholarship of intersectional feminists and critical race theorists, sought to identify longstanding inequalities and level perceived structural injustices within the digital humanities and academia more broadly.
L61: To evaluate these democratic dreams, this essay first roots digital history and the digital humanities in a postwar university landscape torn between New Left idealism and neoliberal transformation. It then tracks the digital history boom of the 1990s and early 2000s, evaluating a generation of digital humanists, lured by the promises of the early internet, who extended access to information and fostered collaboration to widen participation in producing knowledge.
L62: Believing that digitization could tear down barriers to the world’s knowledge, they increasingly introduced the open access movement to academics. But “democratization” is not so simple, and this essay grapples with the contradictions and complexities of an historical moment when not only digital historians but public historians, archivists, and publishers all struggled to balance self-professed democratic commitments against powerful neoliberal impulses inside and outside of academia.
L63: Then, this essay explores a more recent generation of digital humanists, who, frustrated especially with the political economy of academia, are especially cognizant of stubborn structural barriers—the neoliberal university and deep-seated divides along the lines of race, class, gender, sexuality, and colonialism.
L64: Like Alexis Lothian and Amanda Phillips, they “wonder how digital practices and projects might participate in more radical processes of transformation––might rattle the poles of the big tent rather than slip seamlessly into it.”cite40†[14] Finally, surveying recent digital history projects, especially in light of contemporary criticism, this essay considers the myopia of much “democratic” rhetoric in digital history, arguing that while much of history can indeed be open source, democracy itself remains elusive.
L65: For the sake of clarity, definitional precision demands outlining terms such as digital history, digital humanities, open access, and open educational resources. We consider, for the purposes of this essay, digital history as the component of the digital humanities rooted in the methods and discipline of history.
L66: While digital history has a genealogy distinct from the broader digital humanities, and even as many practitioners are invested in drawing its disciplinary boundaries—some, notably, by emphasizing history’s particular capacity for public engagement—digital history nevertheless overlaps deeply with the institutions, technology, and debates occurring within the broader digital humanities.cite41†^{[15]} While digital history is the focus of this essay, we also consider the larger landscape of digital humanities as essential context for our evaluation of democratization.
L67: Of course, definitions of digital humanities abound: “What is DH?” has long been a punchline.cite42†[16] Nevertheless, we draw on Kathleen Fitzpatrick’s capacious definition of the digital humanities as “a nexus of fields” both employing digital tools to conduct humanities scholarship and using humanities methods to make sense of the digital world.cite43†[17] Likewise, when we discuss open access (OA) and open education resources (OER), we borrow from established definitions, such as that resulting from the 2001 Budapest Open Access Initiative.
L68: We therefore use open access to refer to materials not only freely accessible online but also licensed in such a way as to permit users to freely retain, reuse, revise, remix, and redistribute them. OER are simply OA materials used primarily for educational purposes.cite44†[18] And yet, before these terms could mean anything at all, democracy-seeking academics were busy building their foundations on college campuses across the country.
L69: Democratic dreams inspired many of the earliest digital humanities initiatives. While historically-minded computing in the 1960s and 1970s was often confined to a core of “cliometric” historians, the participatory democracy of the New Left would shape an emerging digital history.
L70: “We seek the establishment of a democracy of individual participation, governed by two central aims,” Tom Hayden and members of the Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) wrote in their iconic 1962 Port Huron Statement, “that the individual share in those social decisions determining the quality and direction of his life [and] that society be organized to encourage independence in men and provide the media for their common participation.”cite45†[19] Roy Rosenzweig’s pioneering work would grow directly out of such ideals.
L71: As a former student and colleague, Elena Razlogova, explained, “Roy applied his unreconstructed ‘new left’ radicalism to new digital realities.”cite46†[20] As protests rocked campuses across the West, computer programmers, software engineers, and “hackers” embraced—often in parallel to the competitive corporatization surrounding new hardware developments—the notion of shared knowledge and pioneered the principles that would later undergird digital history’s push for “democratization.”cite47†[21] Richard Stallman, for instance, a freshman at Harvard University in 1970, became active in the nearby hacker community at MIT and, believing “free software” to be a social and ethical imperative, later founded the GNU project and launched the GNU General Public License (GPL) to allow for the free use, modification, and distribution of software.cite48†[22] L72: The tech utopians of the New Left, however, worked in universities increasingly captive to the political economy of Cold War America.cite49†[23] What is often cited as the first digital humanities project, Roberto Busa’s Index Thomisticus, depended upon the financial support of IBM, for instance.cite50†[24] Corporate funds tentacled themselves into every corner of academia.
L73: Neoliberal logics, as historian Johann Neem and others have demonstrated,cite51†[25] further eroded higher education’s capacity to foster democracy through education by slashing public funding, replicating corporate administration, and incentivizing profit-seeking research.cite52†[26] The neoliberal university was born.
L74: Over the following decades, the scramble to adopt new technologies only further blurred the academic pursuit of “democratization.” At the same time that academics championed digital tools as a means to bring education to the masses, notions of world-flattening technology offered moral cover for the decidedly anti-democratic ends of business inside and outside of academia.
L75: The Digital Humanities emerged alongside relentless cost-cutting, the adjunctification of instruction, and diminished public support for humanities education.
L76: Digital history would rely more heavily upon librarians and support staff, not tenured professors; would be housed in centers, not departments; and would depend upon outside grants, not institutional funding.cite53†[27] The field’s democratic potential was constricted before it had even begun, limiting its capacity to fulfill the promises of the New Left.
L77: A survey of early digital projects therefore reveals both the accomplishments and limits of early work in digital history and the broader digital humanities.
L78: In the 1990s, the digital revolution—particularly the advent of widespread personal computing and the “world wide web”—inspired numerous historians and other humanists, eager to make knowledge more accessible, to embrace digital technology. In 1995, the American Studies Crossroads Project, one of the earliest websites of any humanities organization, led English scholar Randy Bass to partner with historian Brett Eynon to lead the Visible Knowledge Project.
L79: Bass and his collaborators privileged pedagogical innovation and student participation.cite54†[28] Other would-be democratizers equated democratization with expanded accessibility. While discussing the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI)—an effort to establish digital standards of textual presentation—at the 1994 meeting of the Modern Language Association, C. M.
L80: Sperberg-McQueen identified three fundamental requirements for scholarly editions of electronic text: “accessibility without needless technical barriers to use; longevity; and intellectual integrity.”cite55†[29] Early digital humanities projects followed suit.
L81: In 1995, two scholars launched The Walt Whitman Hypertext Archive, a collection of digital manuscript facsimiles and hypertext editions of Whitman’s poems that aimed to make all of Whitman’s public and private work  available to all.cite56†[30] The William Blake Archive similarly launched free and online in 1996 to “provide unified access to major works of visual and literary art.”cite57†[31] The Women’s Writers Project, launched in 1999, used TEI standards “to overcome the problems of inaccessibility and scarcity which had rendered women’s writing invisible for so long.”cite58†[32] The “digital humanities”—a phrase not yet widely used—was busy being born.
L82: American historians likewise strove to expand access to scholarly work through digital technology.
L83: In 1993, Edward Ayers and a large, rotating team at the University of Virginia launched The Valley of the Shadow as “an applied experiment in digital scholarship.” The project was a digital archive: it allowed users to freely compare letters, newspapers, maps, official records, and a wealth of other digitized sources from two counties, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, and Augusta County, Virginia (one Union and one Confederate) before, during, and after the Civil War.
L84: It was also, wrote Michael O’Malley and Roy Rosenzweig, “probably the most sophisticated historical site on the Web.”cite59†^{[33]} Gary Kornblith wrote in The Journal of American History that the project “represents the logical outcome of major trends in late-twentieth-century American academic life: computerization, interdisciplinary collaboration, the postmodern complication of traditional narrative, and the democratic search for ways to recognize, even celebrate, the role of ordinary people in making history and culture.”cite60†^{[34]} L85: In 1994, Roy Rosenzweig, then a pioneering social historian at George Mason University, founded the Center for History and New Media (CHNM) to “incorporate multiple voices, reach diverse audiences and encourage popular presentation in presenting and preserving the past”cite61†^{[35]} Rosenzweig worked with the American Social History Project to produce pedagogical CD-ROMs.cite62†^{[36]} In 1998, Edward Ayers and William Thomas formed the Virginia Center for Digital History at the University of Virginia.^{cite63†[37] } At the University of Houston, Steven Mintz and Sara McNeil pioneered a free (though not yet “open”) digital history text, Digital History: Using New Technologies to Enhance Teaching and Research, providing an enduring example of a practical, student-centered project that also explored—in its case, through “hyperlink history”—the new possibilities afforded by its digital platform.
L86: cite64†[38] In 1998, the CHNM launched History Matters: The U.S. Survey Course on the Web, a vast collection of primary sources, pedagogical essays, syllabi, reference material, and other teaching tools that that brought academic historians and high school teachers and students into collaboration .cite65†[39] Such projects demonstrated that expanding access and participation both motivated emerging digital scholarship.
L87: Lisa Spiro, in her essay “Defining the Values of the Digital Humanities,” argued that a set of core values, rather than traditional disciplinary boundaries, demarcated “digital humanities.” Surveying Digital Humanities manifestoes and combing the rhetoric of the young field,cite66†^{[40]} she proposed “openness” as the first of five values governing the field.
L88: “Many scholars hope and anticipate that open practices,” two digital humanists, George Veletsianos and Royce Kimmons, wrote, “will broaden access to education and knowledge, reduce costs, enhance the impact and reach of scholarship and education, and foster the development of more equitable, effective, efficient, and transparent scholarly and educational processes.”cite67†^{[41]} L89: Proponents of digital technology also embraced a participatory ethos. In addition to openness, Spiro, for instance, also touted “collaboration,” “collegiality and connectedness,” and “diversity” as foundational values.cite68†[42] Democratization interpreted as both the expansion of access and participation, was integral to the digital humanities from the very beginning.
L90: Andrea Hunter, writing in the Canadian Journal of Communicationin 2015, argued that such a democratization was the best answer to the chronic definitional question: “What is the digital humanities?” Hunter reframed the question away from technology by emphasizing gains in “access and participation.” Only through such a democratization, she argued, could the digital humanities realize its disciplinary promise.cite69†[43] To illustrate her argument, Hunter specifically cited two projects: The Orlando Project, a self-described “new kind of electronic textbase for research and discovery” produced by the University of Alberta and the University of Guelph that revolves around “Women’s Writing in the British Isles from the Beginnings to the Present”; and CHNM’s Omeka, a digital platform designed to allow users to curate and share their own historical archives.cite70†[44] The first project was designed to bring obscure sources online and out of the archive; the second to allow users to become historians themselves.
L91: Both aimed to make the humanities accessible to a wider audience.
L92: Such projects illustrate the common desires of digital historians and digital humanists to disseminate knowledge beyond the walls of particular colleges and universities. “The notion of the university as ivory tower no longer makes sense, if it ever did,” argued the five authors of the 2012 book Digital Humanities.
L93: “Since the Digital Humanities studies and explicates what it means to be human in the networked information age, it expands the reach and relevance of the humanities far beyond small groups of specialists locked in hermetically sealed conversation.” By connecting specialists across fields, they argued, the digital humanities will “open up the prospect of a conversation extending far beyond the walls of the ivory tower that connects universities to cultural institutions, libraries, museums, and community organizations”cite71†^{[45]} L94: The open access movement grew alongside the digital humanities.
L95: As Martin Paul Eve put it in his recent survey of open access in the humanities, “the overwhelming assumption from the literature on open scholarship is that it has co-evolved with broader technological developments.cite72†^{[46]} The digital revolution brought open licensing into the mainstream with the establishment of Creative Commons in 2001.cite73†[47] The following year, a UNESCO forum championed what they called “a universal educational resource available for the whole of humanity, to be referred to henceforth as Open Educational Resources [OER].”cite74†[48] OER—resources that are not simply freely available online but released into the pubic domain or with an open license that allows users to copy, reuse, revise, remix, and redistribute them—had been born.
L96: When the Public Library of Science (PLOS) began publishing open access journals in science and medicine, open access established a foothold in the academy.cite75†[49] L97: “Open access,” however, remains a relatively new idea for many historians outside of the digital humanities.cite76†^{[50]} In a notice appended to their 2014 open monograph, The History Manifesto, historians Jo Guldi and David Armitage wrote, “Even two or three years ago, most academics in the humanities, and certainly most members of the non-academic public, had not heard much if anything about the Open Access movement.”cite77†^{[51]} But already, as advocate Martin Weller put it, “openness is now such a part of everyday life that it seems unworthy of comment.”cite78†^{[52]} Creative Commons’ open licenses are now ubiquitous parts not only of academics’ general internet browsing but increasingly of their scholarship as well: a number of pioneering publications in the humanities are now following the sciences into open access publishing and grant money is appearing for such projects.
L98: In fact, according to Eve, “It is now more often the practicalities of achieving such a goal that are the focus of disagreement.”cite79†^{[53]} And this is where many projects have stalled—until recently.
L99: In just a few short years, barriers to participation in digital humanities have fallen and institutional supports have risen.
L100: New publishing venues for open-source scholarship and pedagogy; streamlined digital platforms and lowered technological barriers; injections of public and private grant money; the institutionalization of digital humanities in research universities, the development of scholarly guidelines and best practices; and the growing acceptance of open-source scholarship and pedagogy among the academic community have all created the conditions for a digitized history.
L101: Funding seeded the digital humanities across American universities. The National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH) and the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation planted many institutional bedrocks and continue to fund initiatives reshaping the DH landscape, digital public history projects in particular.cite80†[54] The NEH, for instance, whose charter declares that “the humanities belong to the people of the United States,” spun off a new Office of Digital Humanities in 2008.
L102: In 2015, citing an “urgent and compelling” need to pioneer digital publishing, the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation awarded several million-dollar grants to university presses for the exploration of digital publishing models.cite81†^{[55]} Other wealthy foundations have focused on digital publication.
L103: Yale University Library, for instance, received a $3 million grant in 2014 from The Goizueta Foundation to launch a Digital Humanities Laboratory.cite82†^{[56]} It is just one of many new ventures that have smashed barriers to online “publication” with appeals for expanded access.
L104: Historian Daniel Cohen, in the same year that Rosenzweig penned his plea for open source history, said “Resources that are free to use in any way, even if they are imperfect, are more valuable than those that are gated or use-restricted, even if those resources are qualitatively better.”cite83†^{[57]} Recent polls have shown that academics are not fundamentally opposed to open projects, provided they can be reassured that they are using a rigorous product.cite84†^{[58]} But without the guarantee of peer review, how can digital humanities projects win over hesitant academics? As Martin Paul Eve writes, “any transition to open access must necessarily interact with the value systems of the academy and its publishing mechanisms.”cite85†^{[59]} Those very publishing mechanisms have begun to embrace open access, harkening a shift in academia’s prestige economy: scholars can now remain within existing academic structures even as they push the boundaries of access and audience.
L105: University presses, libraries, and academics have spent more than a decade experimenting with and innovating new publishing platforms for open scholarship. University presses have been particularly vigorous in their experiments with open-access and open-source publications.
L106: The University of Michigan Library and the University of Michigan Press launched the digitalculturebooks imprint in 2006 with the goal of “developing open platforms that make openness part of the scholarly peer review process” and publishes work under an Attribution-Noncommercial-No Derivative Works 3.0 Creative Commons (CC) License.cite86†^{[60]} Under Mark Saunders, the University of Virginia Press received substantial institutional and Mellon grant funding in 2006 and 2007 to seed the publication of online texts under its Rotunda Imprint, bringing The Papers of Thomas Jefferson and The Documentary History of the Ratification of the Constitution online.
L107: But if open licensing and digital publishing platforms are relatively straightforward, a financial model to sustain the infrastructure of academic publishing is not.cite87†[61] “If there ever was a time for a university press to go into open access,” Neil B.
L108: Christensen, the director of digital business development for the University of California Press, said in 2015, “this is the time.” That year, the Press launched dual platforms for publishing open-access journals and monographs, Collabra and Luminos.cite88†^{[62]} Striving for long-term sustainability, the press’s open-access business model revolved around authors’ fees and paid reviewers. Collabra, for instance,charges authors a $825 publication fee.
L109: Such a model borrows from the sciences, where fee-based publication undergirds open-access standbys such as PLOS ONE (which charges $1,700 to publish a research article) and Elsevier’s suite of science journals (which typically change between $1,500 to $4000 to publish a research article.) A pay-to-publish open access model, foreign to academic historians, would democratize access at the expense of participation: by opening up research, it would close off routes to publication—the currency of academia—for all but a few.
L110: Under such a model, open access risks becoming, in the words of information scientist Ulrich Herb, “an instrument that creates exclusivity, exclusion, distinction and prestige.”cite89†[63] L111: Much of the financial dilemma confronting the institutionalization of open access owes to larger changes in the financing of higher education.
L112: While the postwar university maintained an awkward relationship with the corporate world, the mania for deregulation in the 1980s accelerated the neoliberalization of higher education.cite90†[64] As public funding stalled and then slowly collapsed, universities began to see research and grant-funding as profit centers.cite91†[65] The ongoing adjunctification of teaching labor further accelerated as increasingly bloated administrative regimes imposed new managerial methods designed to recover costs and improve efficiency.cite92†[66] Lacking public funding but unwilling to pass costs onto practicing historians and other academic humanists, humanities publishers have largely relied upon public and private grants.
L113: In 2012, for instance, the University of Minnesota, through the William and Flora Hewlett Foundation, launched The Open Textbook Initiative, a catalog of online, open-license textbooks. In 2018, The Graduate Center’s Digital Scholarship Lab at the City University of New York received a nearly one-million-dollar grant from the Mellon Foundation to develop Manifold, an open-source web-based publishing platform.cite93†[67] L114: Advocates of OER have continued to experiment with alternative models of sustainable, open-access publishing.
L115: “Access to the work we produce must be opened up as a site of conversation not just among scholars but also between scholars and the broader culture,” wrote  Kathleen Fitzpatrick in Planned Obsolescence, her exploration into the future of technology and academic publishing.cite94†^{[68]} In 2015, Caroline Edwards and Martin Paul Eve launched the Open Library of Humanities (OLH), with grant money from the Mellon Foundation and partnerships with university libraries, to provide a new, sustainable, open-access publishing platform for the humanities.cite95†^{[69]} University libraries, meanwhile, continue to experiment with publishing models.
L116: “If making scholarly research publicly accessible on the Web could go some way toward enlightening the general public about the importance and the skill of scholarly work,” Brown University’s faculty dean, Kevin McLaughlin, said, “that would be fantastic.”cite96†^{[70]} L117: The gold standard of academic scholarship remains the university press, and, over the past years many have incorporated open publishing into their regular imprints. In 2006, The Orlando Project turned to a traditional press, Cambridge, to “publish” the project. Cambridge’s agreement marked a turning point in academic legitimation of open source publishing.
L118: “They are the name,” a producer of the project said, “they have standards.”cite97†^{[71]} Cambridge in particular has continued to experiment with open access. Their 2014 publication of The History Manifesto, a book-length essay by historians Jo Guldi and David Armitage, marked a new highpoint of academic respectability for open access publication in the history profession.cite98†[72] L119: Cambridge is not alone. The University of Virginia Press has long published projects online, if not necessarily with formal open access. The Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press has published multiple influential books online through both an open review and open licensing.
L120: The University of Michigan, from 2011 to 2013, oversaw the open peer review and eventual dual publishing of Writing History in the Digital Age at the same time the University of Minnesota similarly published Debates in the Digital Humanities. Beginning in 2019, the Public Library of Science began to allow authors to participate in their version of an open review, where readers’ reports, editorial decisions, and author responses are all made publicly available.cite99†[73] L121: These developments offered prototypes for how open access platforms can extend traditional notions of “publication.” And such efforts continue to multiply. The boundaries of “publication” are expanding. Stanford University Press, for instance, recently received a large Mellon Grant to bring peer review to digital-native projects. With such efforts proliferating across the university press landscape, academic credibility can hardly be considered any longer an obstacle to democratized access.
L122: And yet academic credibility is not the only remaining obstacle to the flourishing of a democratized digital humanities. In fact, the very mechanisms that triggered its expansion—grant-funding, institutional backing, easy traffic in earnest rhetoric rooted in “democratization”—have raised legitimate alarms. “Access,” it seems, is not the only barrier to a more democratic humanities.
L123: Digitization by itself did not guarantee the broad-based notion of “democracy” so ardently touted by early champions of the digital humanities.  Robert Darnton, historian and librarian at Harvard University, examined Google’s massive book digitization project in a 2006 issue of The New York Review of Booksand argued that,“Yes we must digitize. But more important, we must democratize. We must open access to our cultural heritage.
L124: How? By rewriting the rules of the game, by subordinating private interests to the public good, and by taking inspiration from the early republic in order to create a Digital Republic of Learning.”cite100†[74] Such language has done important work, and great strides have been made in expanding access under the banner of democratization. At its worst, the digital humanities can seem an esoteric world, one more concerned with the code that goes into projects than the utility of the projects themselves.
L125: New endeavors can seem designed to win grants, but not users.cite101†^{[75]} The digital humanities have expanded rapidly over the intervening decades, and yet, William Thomas lamented in 2012, “We are in danger of losing that animating spirit, and we need to recover the democratization at the heart of the Digital Humanities movement.”cite102†^{[76]} L126: The collision of technology and the humanities incites hyperbole: utopians dream of technological revolutions in research and a democratized world of free learning; skeptics warn of a predatory neoliberalism and privatized, profit-driven scholarship and pedagogy that privilege shallow instruction from de-skilled educators.
L127: As early as 1999, Rosenzweig himself, writing in a review essay for the American Quarterly, lamented the “bifurcated tendency toward visions of utopia and dystopia” in discussions surrounding digital humanities.cite103†[77] L128: For decades, the disruption-minded, messianic rhetoric of Silicon Valley overlaid digital history with the moral appeal of democratized scholarship and pedagogy.
L129: In 2006, Siva Vaidhyanathan encouraged digital humanists to challenge techno-fundamentalism, “the misguided faith in technology and progress.”cite104†[78] Critics note that the self-important utopian rhetoric surrounding the digital humanities often mirrors the language and reflects the libertarian social values of Silicon Valley.cite105†[79] The rhetorical similarities between digital humanities and Silicon Valley are stark.
L130: A typical claim made by a commentator in 2010 is indicative: “The digital humanities should not be about the digital at all. It’s all about innovation and disruption. The digital humanities is really an insurgent humanities.”cite106†^{[80]} It is a necessary criticism that much of the rhetoric justifying academic and educational “disruptions” can conceal ulterior motives.cite107†^{[81]} L131: Market logics—corporate restructuring, adjunctification, and relentless financialization—have infected American higher education.
L132: While student radicals dreamed of democratizing the production and dissemination of knowledge, policy makers and administrators increasingly embraced corporate models of governance, reimagining the mission of the postwar university and what scholars of higher education have called an “academic capitalism.”[82] Since at least the 1970s, policy makers have slashed funding to universities and administrators have not only decimated the ranks of tenure-track faculty, they have incentivized profit-seeking research, consistently raised tuition, and embraced corporate bloat.
L133: Surrendering to the imperatives of the market, universities emphasize the production of marketable skills over the inculcation of democratic values or informed citizenship. STEM programs reign, humanities programs decline. This is the academic context in which the digital humanities came of age.cite108†[83] L134: The potential de-skilling of education—manifested most obviously in the shrinking of the ranks of full-time academic faculty—and the relentless chasing of patronage from billionaire-philanthropists and endowment-bureaucracies—while touting “innovation,” “disruption,” and “democratization” —haunts the Digital Humanities.
L135: Wendy Hui Kyong Chun, Richard Grusin, Patrick Jagoda, and Rita Raley warned in 2016 of the “The Dark Side of the Digital Humanities,” arguing that the “same neoliberal logic that informs the ongoing destruction of the mainstream humanities has encouraged” the growth of digital humanities as an institution in higher education.cite109†^{[84]} That same summer, three academics writing in the Los Angeles Review of Books  blamed digital humanities for abetting the neoliberalization of the American university.

